# YouTube Video Transcript
# Video ID: DO3RvrU_r84
# Language: en
# Type: Auto-generated
# URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DO3RvrU_r84
#
# Transcript:
#

So, welcome everyone again.. This is the  data to action webinar series..

My name is Christa Hazen Cove and I'm the director of the clean air program for the energy policy institute at the University of Chicago.. That's a mouthful, so we go by epic for short..

, this webinar series is one we're producing through EPIC's air quality life index program to spotlight case studies from around the world on how air quality data has been used to catalyze cleaner action in its many forms.. , if you missed our first webinar, we hosted the organization Polish Polish Smog Alert, which played a critical role in making air quality data more accessible to the general public in Poland..

, they did this by creating a social movement around clean air and crackout Poland.. And eventually with support from other local groups around Poland, , they u initiated policy action across the country..

And we'll put a link to that webinar in the chat box  if you'd like to check out that video.. By the way, we plan to bring more of these webinars this fall..

So stay tuned until the end of this webinar to hear more about the upcoming ones.. and before I introduce Abid more, I'll  quickly share  EPIC's getting ready to launch the AQI annual report in just a few short weeks..

as is always the case, we'll have insights on on pollution levels and and their impacts on life expectancy from around the world.. And this report will also spotlight some fascinating data to action case studies perhaps including one you'll hear about today..

but on to today's focus, Pakistan.. recently Pakistan's been having what seems like a bit of a air pollution moment  with from what I can tell more attention and resources  devoted to the issue than than ever..

the Pakistan Air Quality Initiative  was among the first groups to generate and disseminate real-time air quality data in Pakistan.. And over the past several years, , they've sparked some serious action along the way..

, the PA Pakistan Air Quality Initiative, , current efforts are geared towards working with the government to strengthen policy action to reduce air pollution in Pakistan..

, and we're also proud to have them as part of the 2025 epic air quality fund awardee cohort, of course.. , we'll hear more about how the Pakistan Air Quality Initiative is working with open data and the government from the organization's founder here today with us, , Abid Omar..

so first we'll hear from Abid and he'll give a presentation.. then we'll have a discussion about his work  clean air progress in Pakistan and the global air quality landscape..

and as an audience member you'll have the option to ask questions using the Q&A feature which you'll see there.. So with that let's get started..

So welcome Abed and now over to you..

>> Hello everyone.. thanks once again for joining this  webinar..

It's it's a real pleasure  to be here and  to to to share the story of how open data has made such a large difference  in in Pakistan and also the the story of Pakistan is actually the story of  air pollution  globally in many ways at least the recent stories of air pollution.. we've actually been doing this since before the first  AQLI global  report came out..

So when we started we were kind of in a gray area with  not knowing any information about what is  happening out there..

So  just  checking if you can see  the presentation before I carry on.. Okay, great..

So  and and I was asked to to like go back  a little bit when we started when I rather started in 2016  what it looked like in Pakistan at that time to be able to you know g give a better sense of  what the data has  done and  that that story is a story of  Lahore and how Lahore has become the global epicenter of air pollution where  it's become come this dreary, smoggy, gray city and it's no longer the city of  of  gardens and and I  always started to wonder that where where did this smoke come from?.

This  gray air this  these winter days where you can't get out on the streets, where you can't drive around, where you're stuck at home.. I was told not to visit Lahore in those winter months..

and  this winter fog  we found out that you know is  has a devastating health impacts but  I I'm going back to a time when we didn't really know anything..

So I started looking around back in 2014 2015 about air quality data for Pakistan and to my surprise there was no available data.. there was  the World Health Organization's ambient air quality database which did have  some air pollution data and  here is what I looked up in 2016  and this is the data they had in 2016 and what's  interesting is even today I just looked up the the current ambient air quality database for  updated in 2024 that they still have the same figures and  when you dig down into those figures is like for Karachi for example the latest readings they show are from an academic paper published in 2010 with  with air quality data from 2008..

So and the same stories for Lahore and and Pashaba and so many other cities.. However, the numbers are really striking even back then that air pollution is  pretty bad in all of Pakistani Pakistan's major cities and it's actually similar to  what was then pollution levels in Delhi and Beijing..

So  with no information about  current information about air pollution, I got curious that what can we do?. What can an ordinary citizen do to find out about  pollution levels?.

And that started with  the the release of  lowcost air quality monitors which only started coming to market around  2016.. And  that that's me with an air quality monitor in 2016  walking around the old city of  Lahore and just  you know visually documenting the the readings from this monitor which you couldn't even extract and and you know save and  do analysis and I didn't even know that what I was doing was a citizen science and u this  single portable monitor then became  a community movement of  where we put together interested like-minded individuals to start hosting monitors in their homes and deploy them..

But more interesting  also interesting is the findings that we had in 2017.. We found out that there were no clean air days in Lahore and the same story is for 2024 that there are still no clean air days..

in fact that the air quality is so polluted that  it doesn't even meet Pakistan's own  environmental standards for ambient air quality.. and when when this when our first  data came out in   for a full year in 2017, I was like how do we communicate this data and  you know how do we make it actionable?.

How do we make it understandable?. So I really started thinking about you know visualizing these  PM2.5  numbers and   and of course like you know just to put the PM2.5 in perspective in Lahore in the winter months it is over 40 times above world health or  world health organization safe limits for air quality and also over 10 times above  Punjab's environmental air quality standards..

So how do you visualize such a number right like how do you make sense of it and  without really using words numbers or graphs like inspired by  Ed Hawkins  global warming stripes I came up with  the air pollution stripes and this was an exhibit back in 2020 at an art show in Karach and you know it's immediately you can tell that which is which city there were no labels about what that you're looking at what data we're looking at and  and people who are not aware about air pollution were like  is this Lahore and is this is Slavad are we looking at blue skies over here and not blue skies so  we did the same thing for a number of other cities I'll show you later but I think more importantly we started putting that data out on  Twitter  inspired by the US embassy's  network which is no longer active  in  initially in Beijing and then later on it was in four cities in Pakistan as well..

So   inspired by that network and by their hourly tweets and even till recently we have been putting out hourly tweets of air quality.. and you know this data being available   through through an app through a website  through social media is help put a magnifying glass on air pollution  where you can  react to it and and and and that reaction is very much what is driving has driven change and policym in Pakistan..

what does this data look like in the long term?. this is our data from 2017 till  2024 and you can see these crazy pollution spikes happening every   year in the winter months and you can see that these are very very  prominent with  PM2.5 levels even exceeding a th00and micrograms..

It's pretty common to be above   250 micrograms which is considered beyond index   sorry which is considered hid hazardous as per the US EPA's  air quality index.. So it's a regular feature..

It's a it's a seasonal feature but when the word seasonal comes up we imagine  okay it's it's going to be a very short winter season.. the  fifth season of smog actually lasts for about  6 months in Lahore and and so the these are things that our data our air quality monitoring network  has  helped  bring to light..

they have created a movement  where today there are over 150 air quality monitoring stations  across Pakistan and  that number  with the epic air quality award should be  increasing substantially in  within this year with  us putting out 150  two  more air quality monitors as well as two other institutions.. the Lahor's urban unit is deploying 160 monitors and  so is the University of Punjab..

So I think the conversation around air quality and the data availability is is going to be changing very rapidly  as we speak  however is that data enough  or is data all that we need..

So  we have done a lot of advocacy   awareness sessions.. I mean there have been  hundreds of awareness sessions conducted across the country  primarily in Punjab  primarily at schools   both private schools, public schools  primary, secondary schools  to  create awareness about air pollution and that awareness is  that Pakistan is the  is part of the global air pollution hotspot with L'ore taking  I I would say like the number one spot..

lore is more polluted than New Delhi when you take an apples to apples  comparison.. and by apples to apples I mean like let's look at this one which is from the US embassy's  network from last year  sorry from 2023 where you can see on the left lore experiences not just higher pollution peaks but also  a longer duration of  air pollution episodes  throughout the year..

So  on average  we we are  a little bit more polluted than New Delhi but you know  these are all hazardous   air air quality to look at..

I was also talking about visualizing this information and communicating that.. So this  chart is relatively harder to understand than these pollution stripes where immediately you can get a sense that  the the first pollution stripe is lore, the second one is New Delhi and you can immediately kind of sense okay Lahore is way more redder than New Delhi..

so Lahore should be the one more polluted and in fact this also shows that Dhaka is also more polluted than New Delhi while Beijing seems to have  cleaned up  its air.. these are by the way all from the US embassy  network  the data that we're looking at..

So it's very comparable data.. So  in Pakistan it's again not just a problem of  Punjab..

It's not just a problem of Lahore.. here's a capital city which is considered  very green..

their annual average PM2.5 levels are also  50 with   winter averages being around 100.. and   besides the the urban areas also in the rural areas we have  crop burning happening which is a big poller  a big yet small poller..

We also have  in in Karachi  I mean so so while I'm mentioning a city this is  pretty universal across Pakistan where you have urban waste disposal happening by waste just being  dumped somewhere and it's  smoldering away.. this particular  image is a bit striking because you have a children playing along the small on on top of the heaps of these smoldering  smoke and  this is not just over here..

This  this in this one is showing you the exact same spot and it goes on for miles and miles and miles that  this is how the urban waste is disposed of in the early morning when nobody is there to really look and observe and see what is happening.. this is my daily commute in Karachi as an example..

there's a main road  separated by a wall where you don't really have anyone going is where the local area dumps their wastes and somebody puts it a fire at night and you know it smolders away..

but you know  these visuals are striking the data is striking..

The numbers striking but we don't really need more data.. We don't really need more numbers..

I always say that  when it comes to these air quality monitors, how many monitors does a place need?. Well, you just need one monitor and after you have the first one, you just need the second one to make sure that the first one is  telling you the truth..

After that, it becomes more academic  to be able to identify, you know, each neighborhood, each district, to identify local sources..

But  what is missing and what is important in Pakistan in India and  in much of the global south is the solutions that have to come out.. what's happening in Pakistan is a great example..

Here is  what was announced by the Punjab government just last week  with great  fanfare about  coming out with these anti-smog guns which are  commonly known as dust suppression systems  used at construction sites and  other activities where you might have localized  sources of dust..

But these are being  promoted as these QR code connected and AI enabled  solutions  to smog.. these are  theatrics with with you know very visible   let's say optical solutions  without really putting in the the effort to figure out where the pollution is coming from..

What is  you know  where is the costbenefit analysis?.

where should we put our scarce resources in having the most impact?. should we define model interventions?.

should we model the policies that we're doing?. And this  smog theater from this year is just one example..

last year was announced the smog cleaning tower.. So these large outdoor air purifiers..

So you know  that being said I do have a lot of hope about what is happening that even though there are these theatrics  at least something is happening the government is very very serious and very very keen about  solving air pollution..

there is a change in the government in the sense that there is a new generation of  leaders of politicians of policy makers of bureaucrats who have come into Pakistan  into positions of power over here and  who want to make their cities  Lahore especially into a world-class city and you go to Lahore you see that it's evolving very rapidly and these  people in the in positions of power know that we have to come up with  solutions ions..

What is missing right now is what those solutions should be and that evidence base  for developing those solutions..

And that is what we  the Pakistan Air Quality Initiative is trying to do  in dialogue with the government  with other research institutions with universities  that we build the evidence base so that whatever measures that are being taken are going to be effective.. They're not just going to be  theatrics..

monitoring very much supports that  where you'll be you're able to  immediately in real time measure the impact of any of those  solutions.. So we do need more monitors..

We need lots of monitors.. we don't need just PM2.5 monitors and lowcost monitors..

We need regulatory grade monitors.. We need to monitor  all the other air pollutants of interest..

we don't know NOx levels and socks levels and other things   in our cities..

So there there's a lot that needs to be done.. and   the World Bank for example earlier this year announced a $300 million loan to the  government to support  and develop  action and policy to solve air pollution..

We have yet to see  what exactly is is going to happen.. we we have seen these  small guns come out but we have yet to see where is the more substantial action and activities  that are going to happen..

So, and that's where we hope that not just us but  countless other organizations  come forward and  provide  the evidence base to be able to make the these the the right  policy decisions because you know to achieve blue skies we have to do it through better science and the future is not just about having more data it's about what we do with it and this is fundamentally a crisis of  policy making and governance and it's also a story of  the the entire developing world of the global south where  the the governments need to come together through ev through the evidence base and figure out  what to do..

We have a very small team.. We're just  five people at the moment..

and  we are a small team with big ambitions and  a big wish that we can make an impact about  cleaning up the air in Pakistan.. So with that Christa, thank you very much..

>> Thank you Abid.. That was  fantastic..

Really appreciate your your overview of  Pakistan air quality and and and some of the work that that you've been doing.. , so I've got a few questions, but as a reminder to to folks, , and as I've put in the chat, , feel free to write questions, , to Abid and we'll get to them, , in the using the Q&A function..

, and also, as , AIT commented in the beginning, super cool to see see so many air quality allstars in the audience here and I'm excited to see what what might you might be , interested in asking.. So  but I I wanted to first ask so as as you noted  Pakistan really does seem to be having a moment with air pollution..

You mentioned the World Bank funding.. we've seen in different ways how the the government is is taking you know interested in in taking action and and  developing plans to move forward   now and and in hopefully the years to come..

And so I guess I if this is possible in a nutshell, what do you think is driven that?. like I'm what are I'm sure it's a collection of works, but I'm curious your thoughts on what's driven that that action as for it being right now like why now I guess  and what do you hope to see happen with that momentum in the next couple years in Pakistan which you sort of addressed that at the very end but curious your expanded thoughts..

So what what's driven that is that you you can only put your head in the sand for so long.. you can only for so long say that this is this is not our problem..

This is  somebody else's problem.. the data isn't going away..

every year, every season we see recordbreaking levels of air pollution.. For example, last November, we saw two weeks with AQI levels reaching  exceeding 2,000 AQI in  Lahore and other cities in Punjab..

And in fact, it was reported by the Punjab government that over   the month of November 15% of Lahar's population was hospitalized at went to the hospital with some issue.. so 15% of the population I believe that number was 1.87 million people  you know so so that's an extraordinary number so  the conversation has shifted from saying okay this data is wrong these lowcost monitors are are misleading  and from doing things like saying that this is a criminal  activity  to release these air quality numbers..

In fact, even as early as last year, we had  one of our air air quality monitor hosts being visited by the police and you know asking them about the air quality monitor and why is it and you know why do you have it up?.

it was an interesting visit because the visits you've had earlier were more like okay shut it down and turn it off.. This time they were more interested in learning more about it..

But it's a very scary   for the police to come knocking on on at your door.. and and also the the conversation used to be a lot about okay it is crop burning  and that is the you know the whack-a-ole approach we must do that that's a problem to solve or the air pollution is coming from across the border and India sending the pollution our way so it's something they have to do so like all of these u you know  blaming some external actor has happened right like blaming the data blaming your neighbor   trying various things and then seeing that okay every year it comes back..

So  they I I feel the government now really wants to do something and they want to do something substantial and  and at the same time there's a huge amount of public pressure and there's a lot of awareness..

I mean there is not a single day in the newspapers  and multiple newspapers and media reports where air pollution is not mentioned in Pakistan and especially during the smog season.. So it has become a major  talking point and and here I must re-emphasize that it is because of the data and it's because of real time  and freely publicly available data that is  driving this conversation..

>> Thanks for that and and sort of relate I sort of riffing off that I suppose and something you've said to me before  and really resonates with me is that  you know the data as as you've been saying it's it's a core piece..

super important, but  the data itself isn't necessarily like why you're in this work.. it's it's sort of beyond the data..

And I wonder if you could if I'm not garbling your words, I wonder if you could  do I have that right?. if you could explain sort of the role of data  in your work and and maybe how you see the role of data moving forward, how it might change like you know initially you're putting up monitors but how you see going forward like data might have a broader  meaning for the work that you're doing  as as as Pakistan's air quality landscape is maturing..

So  to to solve air pollution  there's a very clear road map  of what needs to happen right like it happened in London in 1954 it happened in  all across Europe and in in the US in the 1970s and just  recently it's happened in Beijing and and the first step is air quality monitoring data  to to know about the problem..

The second step is using that data to do modeling to develop  things like emissions inventories and source aortionments  which is  where we are today in our journey and and then with those that modeling you can come up with forecasting  as well which you know is driving a lot of things..

So without the data to begin with like the next steps couldn't happen but for the next step to happen it's a lot harder than  putting out a lowcost air quality monitor because especially here in Pakistan we  so we released our first  emissions inventory  which was sir Karachi  on world environment day and  the the struggle was for us was  putting together    the model for submissions inventory..

are we following the right methodology?. are we using the right tools?.

we we there was no  academic peer that we could turn to or or unfortunately we also couldn't engage anyone or interest anyone outside of Pakistan to  support us with this.. So you know  and by the way we've done these emissions inventories now for a number of cities which are hoping to release  very soon..

But  it's it's always a struggle  to create something for the first time like now that we've done it the first time we're very confident okay we can do it  the  you know for the next city it's going to be a piece of cake but what we're struggling or like rather thinking about now is we want to get into forecasting and you know at this stage we have no idea where to begin because  in Pakistan there are no dedicated research organizations or university departments  who are  working solely on air pollution..

Yes, there are people who  have  done some projects  for a couple of months and then moved on to something else or or  who who might be doing  projects even now..

But you know until there's a full-time focus on this problem by  a countless number of organizations, we're not going to be able to move the needle fast enough..

>> Yeah.. Yeah..

you know with your work you're you've been able to connect the the data and the work that you've been doing with government folks with  media outlets  to a very successful degree and I think  folks in the audience have had also varying  degrees of success in doing that so far too..

Do you have any tips you would give others on how how to communicate?. Because obviously  you know engaging with all these different groups is is critical..

It can't just be it's not one effort, right?. It's it's really an effort building on an effort building on an effort kind of thing..

and so how do you how do you engage folks with your data  from these different sectors especially like some of the core ones meaning government meaning  the media to to get your message out and any any tips you would offer others elsewhere on on what's successful and what's what's not in doing that.. So that that is a difficult part right like engaging with the community and and doing advocacy and and awareness because again like technological  solutions like putting  more monitors is you know  more about logistics similarly like you know what the government's doing at the moment  with say these small guns okay it's like something you procure and you put it out and you deploy it but  raising awareness about  the health impacts of air pollution about what you can do to protect protect yourself  from the ill effects..

what you can you do to protect you know  the the the children and and the elderly..

So  this is actually what our awareness sessions focus more about.. it's it's it's less about the data when it comes  down to it, right?.

Like you know if if I'm I've had  tried many different things in engaging with people whether at  conferences at university levels and at or at kindergartens and I always come down to like it's always  the same messaging that  air pollution in cities in Pakistan is not just bad and it's not just really bad..

it is like the worst in the world and it's so bad that you know we must run away from it yet we can't..

So  we we have to do like certain things but the these conversations besides being at  public   forums and and adver at events is really think the key here is a community like reaching out one-on-one.. You have to build on the ground relationships..

you have to meet people you have to engage with them.. you have to understand their concerns and and and the the sad part is they're like you know what can I do what can we do and it's like okay there's really not much one can do as individuals  about air pollution rather it's about the again about the awareness and the advocacy and you know creating the the public pressure and the incentive  to the policy makers for change so  it's really about building  connections >> totally agree  and I'm going Even though I have more questions, we've got 17 open questions from folks who have  made comments..

So maybe I'll turn to those for a little bit to make sure we get to as many of those as we can.. And and I'll start with one from Deo..

he said, "Thanks Abbott for an excellent presentation.. It does seem like the problem is not a question of policy commitment, which is great..

Question is air quality management an evolved function in Pakistan.. if so how does Lahore compare with other cities in Pakistan in terms of local actions in the last three years?.

>> So  air quality management isn't really existing I would say in Pakistan at all.. it is evolving in Lahore where there have been some stopand go  efforts  going back to 2017  driven by  litigation with the public interest litigation with the Lor High Court  which resulted in the creation of a smoke commission which by the way along with other policy steps  mandated the release of realtime air quality data by the government  which then subsequently triggered them to put up their first  regulator network   the the release of the real-time data is still not done  by the government  up till now  and and there are various policies in place  for  but but there in a way  kind of ad hoc like I don't know now that what is going to happen in the next smog season but  they have similar to India's graded response action plans that okay if pollution levels exceed some certain numbers Then they do discuss and do things like shut down  schools  and  shut ban traffic and ban movement of heavy vehicles..

But these are not things that are really anticipated  in the sense you know if if you're a school and suddenly you're shut down  tomorrow for the next week then it's very disruptive..

And by the way, the these closure closures can go up to   two   months over the smok season and they're very ad hoc like you'll find out today that tomorrow you're shut down.. Similarly, if you're  you know doing a big construction project,  you'll find out that okay, I can't do construction for a month..

So like you know it has these  impacts which are both economic  which both affect  daily life..

So  these policies are a bit  like I said a bit of whack-a-ole policies that you know  it's a laundry list of things that should happen and could happen..

They're not really the smartest   policies but at least they are something be beyond lore.. some of these policies like around the educational institutes do happen in Punjab as well but  outside of that I would say there's really no real air quality management at all like  in in Karachi for example a city of almost 20 million there is no regulatory grade monitoring there is no activity or action by  the government on  on anything about air pollution so it it's it's as a nation as a whole it's largely an an ignored topic though in Punjab the most populous state and with Lahore as Yep center that is where the action is  starting to happen >> thanks for that and I'll call out that  one of  our awardies  the urban unit is a is a government related entity and we hope to have them on as well to maybe share more about  you know a government perspective  in in a future webinar too..

, so another question, , and I promise I didn't plant this one, , but, , Brian Mayo asks, "Do you own the data that you collect or is the air quality data owned by the device manufacturers?. What are your thoughts on that?" >> , we we do own the data..

, and we do you we're device agnostic even though the majority of our devices are by , one manufacturer.. but you know we're open to whichever device  works in our context in our environment..

and  thanks to the Epic air quality  award  a lot of manufacturers have now made their data  openly available  through  the open AQ platform..

So you know it's actually you know  for us the data is openly available to anyone..

one thing about that so the data that's being openly available is hourly level data on the open platform but we also have access to the minute level data from the devices  itself.. >> Thanks for that..

we'll move to Bushian Tulidar.. He says thank you for the excellent presentation and all the good work you're doing..

What do you see as lowhanging fruits  when it comes to solutions particularly for crop burning and open waste burning and what's the response from the government to data from lowcost sensors?. Is it credibility?.

is it accepted or is it questioned?. It's kind of >>  so so so about about the acceptance of data..

Look look  it's been a bit of a head in the stand approach for them putting out a notice  saying that  this is  a criminal action as  per the Pakistan's electronic   and media regulatory authority  where they said that air quality data is only allowed to be disseminated by the government.. luckily nothing came off that and and that's one reason why when you go look at air quality data from Pakistan you don't really see our name that much  that is now going to change with Epic but  the the the the government questions the credibility of the data coming from lowcost monitors  and  well they they even questioned the the data coming from the US EPA's  network over here so I mean data here the government I think wants to own the data and they want to present their own image of what  the air quality looks like..

They don't want some external actor to say okay this is what air quality is.. I hope that conversation is going going to change over the years but the the role of  reg lowcost monitors is not yet  there's not regulatory clarity anywhere in the world about  where they should fit in in terms of law..

of course there's a lot happening in European Union and USA to integrate air quality data in v lowc cost air quality data in various things but so I I think the data will be questioned even if it is a regulatory  coming from regulatory grade  equipment and the other question part was >> I believe it is around solutions I sort of  I see >> so so solutions and lowhanging fruit yes so look  the solutions are easy right like you you saw pictures of  waste on  you know smoldering away like  waste management is not rocket science  landfill site management you know that there's like textbooks out there which you can pick up and you say okay this needs to be done  our local context of collecting waste and disposing of waste would not be very different from you know anywhere else actually  but why it doesn't happen is I think the the real  issue and that that why is a story of every  city and and country in the global south that struggles to like move ahead and that's a an issue of  governance of  oversight of accountability..

that is not happening.. , another low-hanging fruit which  we we feel would have the biggest overnight impact is to improve  fuel standards in Pakistan..

the petrol and diesel that we get  meets  Euro 2 standards and  some of it  so so about 50% is  refined locally and 50% is imported.. So the imported one now after  great resistance by the government now meets Euro4 standards whereas the local one meets Euro 2 standards but these are all stored in the same  storage depots before they're distributed..

So, you know, you can't really choose to  get a higher quality fuel..

And u why do I say that's going to make an, you know, an an overnight difference is because  even though it costs  a couple of billion dollars to upgrade  the  the refineries locally, when you put that billions of dollars in the context of how much impact it is making on the cost of the fuel, it is less than one percentage point..

So you know  when it comes down to it it's it's not that much and and immediately with that one step you will cut down on what is about  30 to 40% of  air pollution  emissions in in most of our cities..

So  crop burning you mentioned look crop burning is just visually very striking.. It only happens for  two weeks of the year roughly like the peak crop..

So crop burning goes on for about a month where it peaks for about two weeks in November and there's also a crop burning  season happening  in the spring harvest I think around March April.. but the pollution levels that you see are hazardous for about six months of the year..

So you know why should we focus our resources on those two weeks  and not look at what are the bigger contributors  over the entire year..

So, and  it's also a harder and longer term problem to solve, right?. Like it's not as simple as saying, "Okay, stop burning." Like what are the alternatives?.

The alternatives cost a lot.. and the alternative is not just to come up with alternative  harvesting methods..

It's it's more about shifting practices towards sustainable and regenerative agriculture and reducing usage of pesticides and fertilizers.. is and you know I mean we didn't even talk about   nitrogen  oxide pollution coming from extremely heavy use of fertilizer in Pakistan and  the risk on  human health by by the way  pesticides are are sprayed over here which are they're not done by machine they're done essentially by by hand where the spray is also coming on the person and you know it's very very poisonous so these solutions are more about again education awareness, changing culture, , , in reintroducing practices..

So, , which will probably take, , a much longer time to, , implement.. >> Thanks for that..

Now, I'm going to for this next question combine a couple..

I see there's a theme from a couple at least a couple folks here.. For example, Moner and Newton , are asking about your how you collaborate , with , various groups..

specifically there's a question about whether you collaborate with researchers from universities whether that's I assume in Pakistan or  elsewhere  how you collaborate with policy makers what does this sort of look like in a practical way u and I would throw in maybe the media there too just like what does the direct engagement look like  for you all >> so  the the difficult one with the government we we haven't really managed to have any particular  success  And that that's I think to do with  how  entrenched organizations like whether it it is government or other research organizations or international development organizations work.. They only want to work with other established actors who've had  decades of  you know experience doing something and having a track record and and delivering on that..

When it's something new you don't have that track record.. so for example the previous World Bank  loan given to Pakistan in 2018  to set up 30 air quality monitors from 2018 they only got deployed last year in 2024 and  the way the project was designed was that it said  okay so these are regulatory grade monitors right so they're like you know much more sophisticated  systems monitoring all the criteria pollutants  it said okay  you have to have done a similar project before of a similar scale and you need to have like you know  financial  outlay of you know many billions of rupees which meant that no Pakistani organization could participate in  you know even could apply to participate in this  so similarly even for smaller research projects whether it's you know policy advisory   the the older entrenched organizations tend to be favored I think air quality  is is is a new field and the way we are working the way the University of Chicago with this award is working as well as some other institutes  some of the names that that are participating here these are all new entities which did not exist  10 years ago  in in this sphere or or in any sphere right like today people doing air quality research I'm sure tomorrow will be like you know they're the climate change  researchers once say  these solutions are on their way..

So  and similarly we've had difficulty  trying to collaborate internationally because  a we haven't been able to let's say drum up the the interest  from someone outside  to work here.. I mean there have been lots of conversations over my  eight years of doing this but has anything actually happened?.

not yet.. Yes, some things have happened with other organizations..

, urban unit  is doing something with the university.. I we have had some very small collaborations but nothing  substantial like you know I mentioned that we need  emissions inventories..

we need to up our game on that say to make it more scientific and rigorous and have source aortionment.. we'd love to be able to work with someone  on that..

The last one about  local universities.. So  we we have say agreements in place with a number of local universities..

So the the prestigious lums lore university of management sciences  the  UML another university in Lahore a university in Karachi.. So   but none of them have the expertise..

So who do we work with over there?. Right?.

Like they want to do something but there's one person who works on energy policy who's interested in doing similar air pollution.. there's somebody working on    electric vehicle policy but how do we get air pollution to fit in where we're still trying to explore  what is the right thing that needs to be done and and often when we come up with an idea okay let's get into forecasting for example there's a lot of demand to have a forecast and  you know if you open the  Google maps and turn on the air quality  layer  only recently they turned the layer on  on on on India but in Pakistan we don't have that but India has  dozens and dozens of locally developed  air quality forecasts  by universities  by other research institutions you can go on their various websites and and find them we don't have a single one for Pakistan so I don't think that's it should be that difficult we just don't know how to do it yet and you know these are the conversations that we have with people okay we want to do this But how do we do that?.

we are  stuck.. >> Yeah, I hear that..

so I believe one more question from  the the audience and then I'll transition to a couple last questions for you..

so someone   Abanaya asks  how the public's responding to the solutions like the smog tower and the anti-mog guns.. And I guess I would broaden that out to also  you know is the public aware for example of this widely aware of this World Bank funding that's coming in sort of what's what's the current appetite and interest around the solutions piece and maybe to the quality of solutions  from the public..

so the the public  awareness is very much there right like like air quality is is in the media discourse it's a topic of daily discussion  the the awareness and the discussion around these solutions is not there as yet  one the the solutions aren't really quantified  there's no like costbenefit analysis like we don't really know what we should do right like I mentioned some lowhanging fruit And  by the way one other context that's very important is what is happening in Pakistan  in terms of  we're going through this rapid energy transition driven by economics where Pakistan is one of the largest    installers of rooftop solar  where we're talking about gigawatts of solar being installed  every month in Pakistan in in  private  setting..

So these are not  huge government projects.. These are like private companies, homes, schools  who are going off the  grid and going into solar..

So that transition is happening.. the EV transition is  let's say coming to Pakistan with two  very large EV producers  announcing that they will set up  factories with the manufacturing starting as early as March next year..

So EVs are going to be out on the road.. So there is let's say behind the scenes a certain transition happening which is perhaps going to really accelerate  the change over here..

there there is there are also electric  buses  coming into play   in in Lahore in particular also in Karachi but the the discussion tends to be more around right I mean like in in a place like Pakistan where if you imagine the common person they're more concerned about  putting food on their table and you know  earning a living and making sure their their children go to school and the  parents are are not sick..

so I I don't think it's the job of the ordinary public to be really  concerned about the solutions that  is the  in the domain of say policy makers supported by people helping develop the evidence base and therefore also like creating the communications and advocacy around  what the solutions should be and you know what are accept what should be acceptable solutions and you know again so that we don't divert our resources into thinking that these  Smoke towers and smoke guns are  the solutions that we should be having..

>> Thanks for that.. Yeah..

I tend to agree it's a lot to ask the public to to vet solutions  technical solutions and and whether they work or not.. so  we do still have a lot of open questions..

Maybe  I'll ask you if you have the bandwidth at the end to to stick around for a few more minutes and perhaps answer by by typing if that makes sense.. some some of the ones that I think are fast..

I think there's a broad question of of how to get in touch with you  after after this in a few different ways.. So if you wouldn't mind sharing that  in the chat  of course we would we'd love that too..

, I guess I wanted to to ask a question that's really around , it's it's a bit weedsy.. , and it's a bit more about the the organization you set up because I think a lot of the folks listening either have set up and thanks for putting your email in, either have set up , organizations or working within an organization or are thinking about it..

So, this is especially for the folks who are perhaps thinking about setting up an air quality related organization.. I wondered if you could just share  a little bit about your thought process of when you when what you were doing turned into an organization and why and you know your thought process of of forming  the Pakistan Air Quality Initiative the way you did you know there's many options one can do one can make a for-profit entity a nonprofit entity they can be part of a university they can be part of you know some existing nonprofit  many they can stay informal I'm curious  why you all formed the way you did and and and maybe a brief timeline of like when when that decision-m happened..

>> So  so this story the story of Paky is of citizen science.. It is of curiosity..

It is of just wanting to know  what what is in the environment and and of course it's it's also a story of  community building and community outreach..

but how it started was and and there's somebody here from Bangladesh who's been asking me for a long time, you know, I want to like do something like this and I'm like just go out there, buy an air quality monitor..

It doesn't co it costs much less than the  mobile phone that most people have, right?. Like an iPhone is $1,000..

This is a $300 device.. You can even get  $100 ones..

You can even these days build your own ones.. there are open- source  solutions out there..

So just put up the first monitor and and then like I said the second one to make sure the first is telling you the truth and and then after that it is all about community building..

So, so with me  I was like okay so I I have  another job  in a field which is completely unrelated in the textile industry and I used to go around to  the government and I would say listen there's a lot of money in solving air pollution there is international funding available from  development agencies why don't you get into it  or or think about it for example I've been trying with the mayor of Karach with Karachi being a member of the C40s cities and the C40s having a clean air  city program with support from the clean air fund and I'm saying like you know get Karachi on board on that but there's no interest..

I went to so many universities and I said, "You need to set up a a research group.. , this is a full-time job like you know, let's put together a team..

I can be on board as a as a consultant or as an advisory role or or or something, right?. Let's get something started." and  and when so many years went by and nothing really happened..

and like I said, there have been some engagements where somebody might have a project for a couple of months and then do something, but they're not air quality  experts..

they're not atmospheric  scientists or or chemists.. it's not their field and those people don't exist in Pakistan..

So  it finally came down to I was like okay like I've already devoted so much of my life and my time on this issue..

and I there are many times that I have given up where I've said okay I don't want to do this anymore.. Like I'm sick of hearing about PM2.5 and lowcost monitors..

There is more to the world and more to life.. But then I think of the impact that  that this has made  to date..

I mean the the impact is not  localized in in one neighborhood or one city.. This is a nationwide  impact and and that impact of that awakening of a nation about its air quality problem and its potential in  driving change in Pakistan in terms of  improving the the health  life expectancy  economic benefits  of air pollution like you know solving air pollution like there's so many benefits that I think this is the most important  thing to work on  in terms of its impact And you know like unlike say like climate change where you think of a glacier melting in the Pakistani Himalayas or the Swiss Alps it's something very foreign and something very far away that that image of you know the the polar bear fall on the you know floating on an iceberg like this is stuff that you can't hide from..

You feel it every day.. it doesn't matter if you're rich or poor  if you have an air purifier or or a mask..

you simply cannot hide from air pollution.. So  that was that was my personal incent incentive and still is but I think the first step happened was  putting finding the right team of people to work with and and with that   Darab  agreed to come on board he's  does a climate and policy  consultancy so so he came on board and when I said okay if if you're coming on board as a full-time person we can do this and  the the day we kind of officially launched we already identified  our first  data scientist who's is you know very young very talented doing an incredible work like you know he's doing a lot of the let's say hard work  behind the scenes for us  he was in the earlier epic webinar that we did on population based optimization of air quality monitoring network so like you know I think just take the first step and and then start it doesn't matter if it's a part of a university if it's you know private or is it nonprofit those are all secondary considerations and those are also to do with the local  environment we by the way tried for over a year to register as a nonprofit in Pakistan and eventually we found out that  it's just not going to happen so we had to register as a as a for-profit even though we are working  as a nonprofit entity so I mean th those are local  challenges And I believe in India it's the same where to become a nonprofit  these days it's it's just somehow not encouraged..

So but you know ju just take the first step just start something start somewhere and  it takes a life of its own..

>> I think that is the the perfect place to to to wrap up.. so I I know we didn't get to nearly all the questions..

again  I'll ask if Abid you have five minutes.. Our team will take a few minutes afterwards..

so if you asked a question, want to see the answer, we'll do our best to to type in  responses to to everyone as much as possible.. but  I want to thank you Abid  to you and the Pakistan Air Quality Initiative for for joining us today to share your work  which has lessons not just for Pakistan but many places and people across the world who are  you know working in their community or with their government   toward toward cleaner air and how basic data can be the start of of that change..

I also want to thank Tanushi Gangali who's the director of the air quality life index program who is the the mastermind behind this webinar series.. and as for the upcoming data to action webinars we plan to hold a few this fall featuring work in South Asia hopefully Pakistan again as I mentioned Southeast Asia and Africa and especially honing in on stories from governments and about how governments are using air quality data to move forward  first ever landmark clean air legislation in a few places..

So stay tuned for more details on that.. , thank you again for joining and have a good morning, afternoon or evening wherever you are across the planet..

And thank you, Abid again.. >> Thank you everyone..

>> If you're able to stay on a few minutes, >> I I I am available.. Yes..

>> Well, I will also stay on and and type answers.. >> I can also have >>  there are a couple of questions about data availability..

So look  we still trying to figure out what the best way to share data is I  our data is best I would say accessed through open AQ  it is not online yet  over there but it will soon be  we kind of struggle because we do it manually where we pull  the data and then consolidate it and using Excel..

So that is one of our say struggles where we want to figure out how we can automate it.. so I mean we we get so many requests about   sending data and we do send data where we can..

and especially we found out that with when it comes to well media they don't want data they want actually the analysis.. So we also do that where it's not just okay here's a you know a CSV with you know th tens of thousands of rows but  here's the analysis and our thoughts  behind it..

But anyone doing science  just send an email and we'll send you whatever data that you're looking for.. Tanushi any question that you think we should look at?.

There's one interesting question on  this  ongoing efforts in Pakistan to take key stakeholders such as healthare professionals on interpreting air quality data.. That was an interesting one..

If you want to take that up.. So we we put together  a group of  a community of practice called the Pakistan air quality experts group where we do have  policy makers, climate change people,  doctors,  other health professionals,   lawyers..

So who who are interested in in doing certain things but health  and there is one researcher who is actively doing a project  on air quality.. we're doing that with her but there's nothing really published but at the same time I would say there's not much happening  on health research and  health research is probably the most important area  where one needs to be working on because as more and more research is coming out  the global burden disease and so on we're finding out that air pollution is much more dangerous than has been anticipated and every  revision is is you know answering that  telling us it's more dangerous but how much of that research is being driven by extremely polluted environments in Pakistan in India and Bangladesh and in  Africa in the global south that I think is an area where a lot more needs to be done but  health research is such a  complex  field and and it's a field that let's say like best left to the the health professionals and you know I I wish there were projects  that I knew of that are happening in Pakistan about that..

Okay.. So, any other questions?.

>> There are a couple around validating the sensor data if you want to take those.. >> , so  we're using let's say sensors by other manufacturers..

We we deliberately said I don't want to get into like making our own sensor by getting a plant tower  and you know putting it together because you're better off using something that's established and tested in many other parts of the world..

So companies like IQ Air, Air Gradient,  Purple Air are are doing that.. So they are validating them in their environments..

yes we we do have let's say sensors installed close enough  let's say a kilometer away from the US embassy when they were  reporting air quality data so we have done those comparisons  and we find that   where when you have just one monitor in one location and the embassies tend to be in a more polluted part of the city they have much higher pollution levels so our  network is a bit more representative but that that said like often in my presentations I don't even show data.. I show  data coming from the Pakistan government..

I show  US  EP  you know the embassy's data and  basically what we found if the US embassy for example for Lahore  was showing that it's 124 annual average and and our monitor was showing let's say 120 and and the government's  data was showing 100..

They're all kind of saying the same thing at the end of the day.. that being said we are in discussion at this very moment with the Punjab government about doing  collocation  studies  and those systems really serious..

I hope they do happen because you know it'll help   us  validate our sensors for  the environment over here >> and I think we've gotten to it..

I tushi flag any others you think we might want to answer but I also want to be  mindful of your time Abid you've been gracious with staying a little bit longer but anything else you would flag Tushri >> no I think we've covered all the themes >> great well thank you again Abid thanks Tushri thanks for  the folks who are still on here with us  and hope you join us for our next session >> bye >> thank you very much >> bye thank you >> bye Christa Byri and thank you all the attendees Bye-bye.