# YouTube Video Transcript
# Video ID: 2KoDvIb954c
# Language: en
# Type: Auto-generated
# URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2KoDvIb954c
#
# Transcript:
#

All right, welcome everyone to this edition of the data to action series.. My name is Christa Hazenope..

I'm the director of the clean air program for the energy policy institute at the University of Chicago, EPIC for short, because it is a mouthful.. , and we are so excited today  to talk with urban unit  who are doing  clean air work across Pakistan..

, and this is an especially critical moment for discussing data and clean air action.. October marks the start of the northern hemisphere pollution season which has  as many of you already know  an especially hard impact on South Asia..

so I think it makes our our conversation  particularly preent.. so I'm going to get right to it..

first though I do want to welcome all of you from across the world who are joining us  and appreciate your  participation.. and you'll have an opportunity to  ask questions using the Q&A function  throughout the the  conversation, but we'll hold them those questions until the the end..

, and I'll kick off with just a couple slides  to help set  the the context and also share a little bit of background  about the EPIC air quality  award.. And so, let me share my slides..

All right.. So  as background the epic air quality fund  is a fund we launched last year  to support various groups whether they're governments  nonprofits research units  for-profit entities around the world working in places where there  has  historically been very little open  air quality data and where  we estimate  a little bit of air quality data  or possibly a lot as you'll hear in the case of urban unit can have  a national level impact..

so far we have 31 awardees across 19 countries.. You can see them by the dots, the yellow dots on on the map and  our priority areas are  anywhere in whether it's dark or light purple across the the world..

and  we've been surprised frankly  even though we had very high expectations for what  various groups would be able to do  if given the opportunity to  generate open data and use it for for national impacts.. we've been surprised at what's happened a year in..

so for example we've seen a 33% increase in openly available monitoring data across Africa  from Epic AQ fund awardees and that's per the data from open AQ.. This is basically 25% of data u of openly available data  on the African continent is being generated by epic AQ fund awardees..

in the case of Pakistan n over 90%  of the open data shared  is coming from EPAQ fund awardees.. and you'll hear how a good proportion of that is coming from  being generated by the urban unit across the the country..

, and frankly, , one of the, , greatest pleasures of of of my days has been seeing, , various posts on social media, , of awardees announcing, , their their work.. Every day seems to bring something new..

A few weeks ago, we heard from, , Clean Air Liberia and how they're launching, , the nation's first coordinated air quality monitoring project.. just  a day ago, less than 24 hours ago,  we heard from a group in the Zambia who's  launching  the country's first lowcost PM2.5 sensor network  and sharing all of that data in in real time  and openly..

So  it's been quite exciting.. the context of this conversation again is is to discuss  clean air in Pakistan  as as sort of a a context setter though I think you'll hear a lot more detail from   urban unit about this  for for from the data that we have that spans a couple decades and this is  satellite derived data  so different than the gold standard of having  ground monitoring data  but we have a a two decade record  and it shows increasing levels of air pollution over time across Pakistan on an annual average PM2.5 basis and that also means   relatedly that this is a larger and larger impact on  life expectancy  for the country..

so currently Pakistan ranks three  out of 252 countries and  territories across the world in terms of pollution levels.. it's first in terms of the cause of death in the country..

and this means that it actually has a a 6%  impact on Pakistan's GDP each year.. So quite the profound impact..

And so I think that's  both that health and economic   context  is important as we go into our conversation   coming now..

And so with that, and I'm getting my screen back together.. So with that,  I'd love to welcome  Dr..

Muhammad Omar Mousad,  of the C the CEO of the urban unit.. the urban unit as an entity, our Epic AQ fund awardees..

and they've already launched 160 monitors across I believe 14 cities in Pakistan.. Frankly, the number keeps changing and growing..

, so, , hopefully I'm not in error.. , Omar can, , correct me if I'm wrong..

, and I believe it is the largest ever open real-time air quality network, , in the country.. , a little background on on Omar..

In addition to being the CEO of Urban Unit, , he's a former member of the Pakistan Administrative Service.. He's previously served as , the government of Punjab's additional secretary of finance..

He holds a master's degree in public policy from Princeton University and a PhD from MIT in urban policy.. and  as additional context to urban units work in addition to what you'll hear today, we'll share in the chat  a recent piece  we published on on their work as well..

and I think both that piece and and my intro really just gives you a tip of the iceberg  about Omar and the urban unit.. but we'll get to hear  more about  both of those in in  just a moment..

So just a reminder again that you'll have a chance to to chime in with questions at the end of the conversation.. So again, at any point you can use the Q&A function in Zoom to  put forward those those questions  for  Omar or  the Epic AQ fund  as well..

And so with that, , I I'd love to to to talk, , Omar.. First of all, welcome again, , to the conversation..

I'd love to talk to you a little bit before we dive into, , a presentation about all the work you all have been doing around clean air.. , would love for the audience to get a better sense of, , who you are, , why you're doing the work you are, a little bit more about Urban Unit, which does a lot more than just air pollution work..

, so over to you for an introduction.. thank you Christa..

It's good to be here once again u  you know for this webinar..

I think I was part of it also last year in some way.. well  the urban unit  you know it's a nice sounding name but that's not our official name..

Our official name is very officious.. It's urban planning services limited company..

So but no one wants to be called the urban service limited company.. So you know my predecessor came up with this sort of acronym or a small sort of a name smaller sort of a name  urban unit and it has stuck..

the urban unit is a corporate organization but it is wholly owned by the government.. So it is a public sector corporate..

I am the only civil servant in the urban unit at the moment.. I'm regular civil service but the rest of  more than 240 employees of the urban unit are market highest so they are on contractual position very much like everybody is in the USA   so   this is the urban unit in the sense of its  employment strength  urban unit is a unique organization  we advise the government we consult and because of our particular particular position in the government we are at the interface of where government ends and where the non-governmental sector or the private sector begins..

so you know that sort of opens up for us a lot of vantage points which a regular department does not have and because I'm governed by a board I also have  relatively greater flexibility in pursuing ideas  and initiatives which perhaps sometimes government departments  are unable to do even if they are all well intentioned to do so..

we are a very small organization  but we have resources at our disposal  which are sort of  available to us   under the mandate of our board.. So the ideas comes from the management the board approved and and you know we've worked in urban planning we have got a very strong geographical information database that's our key strength these days and it was actually GS which sort of drove us into clean air and air quality..

so the urban unit originally never had an original idea about improving air quality.. Let me confess you know that..

so we sort of grew into that role.. and that came about I think in 2021 when  we we procured a BAM monitor I you know and that was the only BAM monitor outside the US consulate at that time in the city of Lor and you know that sort of gave us a special privilege that other than the US consulate the other reading that we had was the urban units you know reading so that was our foray assume so to speak into air quality measurement and because we have a very very good GIS team we were able to map air quality locally also and that is something that I will be sharing with you later on how we use this data from our sensors  in giving more local solutions because I think  policy works both ways it works top down and bottom up so I would not advocate either a bottom up approach or a top down approach..

I think it's you know it's it's both..

and you know over a number of years that I've been now here at the urban unit I've actually to realize sometimes the bottom up works very well and sometimes the top down very well..

we are  particularly placed in that advantageous position that I can be bottom up at the same time and I can be top down at the same time.. So you know that that really gives us a lot of advantage in pursuing ideas in implementing them and getting them to mainstream policy..

That's the last mile of any initiative that how does it affect policy and how does it sort of mainstream itself and institutionalizes itself  you know in the operations of government  whether they are national, provincial or even local governments..

So that's I think a brief intro or random words about the urban unit.. I suppose >> that was  really helpful and I I couldn't agree more about it takes both bottom up and  you know top down approaches to for success ultimately for policy success..

if you wouldn't mind I think  many of the folks listening they're coming from different different career stages different levels.. if you could help demystify a little bit  a as you know you're the CEO of Urban Unit but  could you share a little bit about your trajectory like where where are you coming from this work?.

I know I I read your your you know educational background but what sort of path led you to doing the work at Urban  and and I know  you know you mentioned specifically with urban unit how  it became engaged with with air pollution work but also like personally  when it comes to air pollution in particular like why why you care about it..

Okay.. So let's start with me first..

You know when I completed my PhD from MIT and by the way I you know I did my PhD from MIT when I was already in the civil service..

so I took some time off.. that time off stretched into years and everybody got worried at home whether he's ever going to come back from the USA or not..

but finally I sort of you know returned victorious with the degree in hand..

So you know that was one thing  you know I at that time I thought leave government  you know but every cloud has a silver lining  you know covid happened and you know we in the civil service thought that there's no better future than being in the civil service because everybody else was losing their shirt you know and their jobs..

so you know people advised me that you know stick on and you know things would improve..

but way to  well this position  unfortunately  you know fell vacant because my predecessor  you know died in an air accident  that was really sad but  when I joined the other we were in the midst of co you know I I I still remember it was June 2020 and the vaccines had not come online and everybody thought that it's going to be how many years before we actually get infected..

and you know it was at that time I remember not due to me but  Khaled who was my predecessor urban unit was doing a lot of work in  lockdowns you know  co used to have lockdowns where you used to actually quarantine  or you know lock down those areas where  there were hotspots of COVID infections and that was the first time when urban units started working at a scale in the city using GS..

it was very agile sort of an environment in which you had to respond almost on a daily basis  on what where are the new hotspots, which hotspots need to be opened up, lockdowns to be lockdowns to be imposed and there was an issue of supply chains for food, for medicines, for pharmaceuticals.. So all this thing was being mapped by the urban unit and an analysis was done..

So that that I was really impressed.. you know coming from MIT I was actually really impressed and at it was at that time I really thought that the future of this organization is data  you know  and  if we can sort of map data we are already sort of eons ahead of our local level  you know counterparts or local competition and that's how you know we sort of got into the world  it's only when we actually acquired that BAM monitor..

We we then actually realized that you know the whole world is talking about clean air and the quality of the air and then 2022 happened..

That was the I think the first season in which the air quality really got bad really got very very bad in Lahore.. It was so bad that it was visible..

You could feel it.. Your eyes sting your throat used to sting..

So you know you did not monitor to tell you or a sensor to tell you that the air quality was bad and that was the time I think then when urban units started seriously thinking about doing something about air pollution..

we wrote a report sort of a back of envelope calculation of how much air pollution is contributed by different sectors of the economy in Lahore.. That really created a ripple, more of a splash in the local bureaucracy because they sort of disagreed with our findings..

And to be very truthful, our findings were very back of the envelope calculations and they were not that accurate.. But they sort of stirred the pot..

You see when we talked about transport being a major contributor to air pollution  that sort of put the spotlight on the transport department upon the local government upon the traffic management in the city and all that.. they sort of felt responsible that  these organizations sort of were you know  prodded into doing something about it and when you start doing something about it you also need to do how well you have done and that's how the urban unit sort of you know placed itself in a role in which we used to offer data also used to follow up on what result of the action taken one set of data And this is what we are doing even right now as we speak..

the smog season or the poor air quality season has just started.. 15th of October as soon as you cross 15th of October almost till the end of January it is  air quality is really the temperature goes down there's the inversion effect and  the wind pattern sort of slows down..

there's not much as much wind blowing so there's hardly any dispersion so it it's like a cloud which hangs in the air and it was at that time that  the urban unit partnered with the Pakistan air quality network that too was an interesting experience because that was a totally non-governmental sector organization but we needed people who could talk our language who were sort of thinking what we were thinking nobody was thinking this thing in the government at that But  we came to realize that the non sector has started sort of identifying this problem.. So we wanted to be  with people who were thinking what we were thinking..

You know we thought that if we had them at our back we we could sort of double our voice or triple our voice as far as the government is concerned..

you know as time goes by comes 2024 we have a new elected government here in this province and all of a sudden we have a ministers and a cabinet which is very very much concerned about air quality..

You know the air quality has become a performance indicator with the current provincial government and it's a performance indicator which they have pinned on to themselves..

Nobody asked them that you are actually responsible for  for improving the air quality but it it's it's like that you sort of set a target for yourself and then you try to achieve the target and you made make it very public that this is the target that we are going to achieve..

So 2024 which was last year was the first time in which we really saw the whole of government trying to come  together to grapple with this issue of air quality and you know I can share and I will be sharing with in in couple of slides my experiences experience which I sort of learned as a civil servant is tackling poor air quality is a massive coordination..

problem when it comes to bureaucracies, you know,  realizing the problem is something else..

Even identifying the solution is something else.. But then coordinating and implementing those solutions is really hard is is super super hard..

You have multiple agencies, you have different organizational cultures, you have different data streams.. the data is not interoperable in some cases..

It's not standardized.. So when you start implementing it, it it it is a bumpy ride, you know, to start with..

you know, there's a lot of friction, there's a lot of misunderstanding, miscommunication, but as the season went on, you know, people sort of got into the groove of things and this is the second year that we are using this whole of government approach..

So we already have a matrix and the urban unit sort of backs stops it by providing the data for it or doing the analysis for it.. And now it's not only the urban unit which is doing it replicating what the urban unit is doing it the environment protection department which is also now the climate change department  is also doing the same thing..

So you know our presence has made  at least government organization change their  view about  how to tackle  the deterating  quality of air in Lahar and in the province of Punjab..

So you know that's  you know that's how  we are at the moment handling things and epic 160 sensors have been transformative had been really really transformative and I can tell you of many sort of anecdotal evidence that I have in the last two three weeks that how much are lowcost air sensors are playing a very very positive role in making the government actually realize that this thing can be only sort of tackled through a network rather than only government organizations working..

We really need to build a strong network which includes  which includes  public sector partners, non-governmental sector, the private sector,  any agency that you can think of on how to sort of improve the quality of the air and what they are being driven by is the data which is coming from these sensors.. And when these sensors are sort of in meshed with the government's own air quality measuring data, you sort of start expanding the sensor network..

So the baseline as I view it is the sensors in which the urban unit or epic sensors play a very very important role.. Then there are the sensors of measuring equipment of the government..

Then there is the private sector, the non-governmental sector..

So there is a huge sort of a pyramid of   you know monitoring and measuring which is sort of evolving and growing in Pakistan and that is from where all the information is actually coming in..

Now the biggest challenge that we have is now start deciphering that information trying to control the flow of this information making sure that we get rid of the outliers look at the hotspots not to be driven by one crazy sensor somewhere and sort of you know start thinking of it and just you know  missing the rest of the problem which is around you..

I mean these are the experience we are at at the moment experiencing almost on a daily basis.. So it's 7:00 right now over here..

I think by 11:00 the wind will really die down.. the temperature will cool down and the or the air quality starts deteriorating and that's when the sensors go crazy and people who are actually measuring them then start identifying what's going on in this neighborhood what's going on in that neighborhood and we have a small presentation we can share it with you that what exactly we are doing I think that would sort of give you much more of a contextual background to this that that  sorry that sounds perfect and  just to chime in I think  I your point on  coordination being the thing  I think I I often think  air pollution does not it's not rocket science it's actually harder it's coordinating people so I think this is >> yeah it is it is it is it is >>  so you know you know there are number of slides over here some of the slides I'll just simply breeze through and I'll rush through..

I'll not sort of elaborate a lot.. So,  I'm the vocals over here and Mr..

Hassan is on the drums so he's managing the slides.. so, u Hassan, can we have the next slide?.

well, here we are.. I think  University of Chicago knows more about it than we do..

are we sharing the slides here?. >> Yes..

Yep, we can see them.. >> Yes, Christa, you can see them, but I've lost my sight..

>> Okay.. , so, you know, I'll not elaborate upon this, but we at the moment are thought to be the most vulnerable country to climate change and, you know, we have an ample evidence for the last 10 years to, you know, suggest that..

Next, next slide please..

I'll be focusing on the province of Punjab which is the most populous one.. I could have sort of taken the entire Pakistan but that would take a longer time and a longer presentation..

27 million that's almost 128 million.. but focus on the bottom..

This is from where our  air quality  you know factors which affect air quality..

39% is from transport, 24% is industry, 16% is energy.. Agriculture is 11%..

And 9% is basically non-combustion or industrial processes.. Next slide please..

smog in Lahore.. You know this is how it actually started when we I mean this was one of our earlier slides when we started looking at the smog phenomenon but but we did not have the smog data but we had a lot of other data..

The urban unit knew what was the population in Lor, what was the growth rate, what was the density and we could map up we could map the builtup area and the you know density of Lor..

This is the city of Lahore for you to see.. so in  in the last 20 years  the builtup area has gone up by 35% which is quite significant..

Next slide please..

Again you know this again suggests that Lahore was always a poor air quality  city but it's after 2020 and after 2021 that really you know the air quality in Lahore gets really   bad..

Next slide please..

I I always  can we minimize this thing?. the I I can't see this one..

Thanks.. Okay, you know, I would spend some time on this slide..

, you know, this is our basically daily readings and , you know, the boxed , part of the graph really shows you the period of really poor air quality October to February..

And one thing that you can notice is that the spikes are getting higher and higher and the variability or the variance in this graph.. So if you look at it look at it very closely is really increasing..

So  201920 yes we had had air but look at 2021 and then look at 2024 we had you know these monstrous spikes of really poor quality air days..

Next slide please..

we did a analysis.. This is not epic sensors..

These were basically   IQA sensor and you know these are our first maps that we actually started actually publishing..

We looked at sensor data and because we could map this thing.. the red  part is the hotspots of really poor air quality in the district of Lahore..

So the district of Lahore is primarily the city of Lahore.. So it's almost 50% or more than 50% of the district is the is the city of Lahore..

Next slide..

This is a super interesting slide.. you know  then we sort of the frequency of really poor air quality reading sensor wise..

So these were the sensors that we had from IQ air and you could see that it is it is the center of the city and it's the arterial roads of the city in which you have really really poor quality.. Next slide please..

I always love to show this slide.. you know this is when you use demographic data and  local  air census data and put them together..

the first half of this  slide really shows  the neighborhoods in which the elderly live in the district of Lahore or in the city of Lahore and just look at where the poor air quality is.. It's almost on top of them..

So from a health burden point of view  the most vulnerable population in the city of Lahore is really the elderly in terms of  lung infection in in terms of chest  infection  ear and nose infection eye infections the elder are the most vulnerable segment as far as the city of lore is concerned.. Next slide please..

Now let's sort of zoom out and let's look at the province of Punjab..

it's  it's  it used to be a rural province but it's now a very fast urbanizing province..

So whenever you know urbanization sort of takes off you will  you will see the problem of air quality emerging..

So the problem is not only concentrated to the clusters around Lahore the problem is all over but we are not at it and that's why60 census that we have placed we have also included some of the secondary cities and some of the intermediate towns  they never had a sensor to start with but just look at the growth rates of some of these urban settlements and this is from our census our last two censuses you know these are amazing growth rates So there is a lot of urbanization and unplanned urbanization which is taking place and unplanned urbanization is eventually going to lead to a poor air quality problem..

Next slide please..

I mean this is the city of Lahore as as it as it expand or over a 10 year period.. So  over a 20 year period in fact 30-year period..

as you see  you know initially it used to be a very smaller city it was like 250 kilmters in 1995 around about 300 kilometer now it's almost square kilometers so in 30 years the city has grown three times in terms of builtup area  transport we always talk about transport 21 million vehicles in the province   30% of them are registered in the city of Lahore and about 1,800 new motorbikes are registered in the city of Lahore..

So motorbike  transport is very popular  because low incomes and affordability issues motorbike has come to represent  most preferred mode of transport necessarily not the most environmentally friendly from a clean air perspective.. So the government is trying to do something but it's like  you know trying an ocean..

So they have with limited resources that that they have they have started an electric bikes program.. They have introduced 1,500 electric buses..

This is a massive investment and this is really going to have an impact.. there is a proposed buyback policy for old buses because they contribute to a lot of emission vehicle emission testing and on over a longer term there is a fuel  testing labs that that are going to be  sort of you know set up to check whether the fuel quality is extended..

Next slide please..

The industry in Lahore as you can see it's  68% is within the city.. That's one of the issues of unplanned urbanization..

What happens is that the industry then gets engulfed within the unplanned growth of the city and then that really becomes a problem..

So we have done environmental mapping of the industries in Lahore.. We have sort of mapped industries which have now installed emission control systems..

strangely enough we also have a live feed of industries which are you know emitting small smog..

So how effective that is but you know that sort of a check or a psychological check that the government is actually watching industry which is polluting the air..

Next please..

Stubble burning.. so for people who do  the rice crop  essentially is grown in the summer and the monsoon season..

So to clear the field for the wheat crop  the farmers burn the field instead of removing the stubble which is very hard to do and it is very time consuming takes a lot of labor.. They they prefer the sort of more conventional and a historical method of burning the field..

It really never used to matter when the city was very small and urban areas small.. Field burning used to take place or stubble burning used to take place but now it has become a major major problem..

Next slide please..

tall buildings under constructions  under construction tall buildings big big issue and that's where the sensors the local sensors really come into play.. fugitive dust is one of the major contributors as far as PM2.5 is concerned in the city of Lor and we sort of realized last year by doing this study that wherever there is a construction site and especially a tall building construction site there is a lot of fugitive dust next and we have you know almost  looked at all options to sort of control this issue of fugitive task..

So water sprinkler systems  have been made where construction sites are and now a construction site is actually certified by the environment protection department that they have installed the proper systems for controlling fugitive dust..

Next  can we go to the last slide please?.

you know but these are actions on the ground what what can we do with evidence at a much higher level at at a policy level so we've been  the urban unit  the government the  department for environment protection and climate change the senior minister for u environment protection and climate change they've been always advocating that the government this time this time around is using data and is using data to take certain actions so it's its actions are based based on some evidence..

There is always a debate and how how thorough that action is or how robust that action is and there will be a debate what actions need to be taken and what actions need to be prioritized.. But that is the nature of the beast when it comes to air quality control in cities and we've been open to criticism and we've sort of even faced criticism of  what type of actions that we are taking..

Next slide..

But then we have sort of  you know as I said we pinned this responsibility on oursel..

Nobody wrote the Punjab vision.. It was the government which wrote the Punjab vision for  clean air or climate resilient Punjab..

Then we wrote had a smog mitigation map for Punjab..

Then a clean air Punjab action plan for 24 from 2024 to 20  34..

So it outlined the roles and responsibilities of these various actors within the government on how can they actually improve air quality.. Next slide please..

Now let's come to Epic and the senses that we got from them..

First thing first, you know, I was a student of urban planning at MIT and MIT is in the school of architecture..

architecture is all about design and the most fantastic thing about the sensor was actually its design.. I'll not name the company which is actually sort of which sort of provided us the sensors but the design was so attractive..

It was like having an iPhone of air sensors.. You know it was smart..

It people used to everybody liked to be photographed with it.. So  you know that is one thing  which made its acceptability for installation so easy..

Next next slide please..

So right now we have as Christa you were right there 160 lowcost monitors across Pakistan..

Some of them are offline these days and I'll tell you why they are offline.. they are in cities..

And finally our our really our goal is to achieve that critical mass of data reporting so that national ambient air quality standards are demanded to be enforced..

But this the government cannot do alone.. This the government can only do when it networks and what is trying to do is to trying to build and establish that network..

We we interface with the government.. We also interface with the non-governmental sector when it come to sensor installation..

Next slide please..

This is a map again  showing sensors.. So they are all over the country..

So all all  major urban centers now have got the  air quality sensors of the urban unit..

Next slide please..

Next..

Here we are.. So what is our sensor data for last?.

So we we had our census online 3 months ago and this is what the data is showing.. This in itself is very telling..

Faslabad  or Rahul Pindi or the city of Bahalpur or the city of Multan never had a map like this or a chart like this or a table like this.. So one thing I can tell you if you are traveling to Pakistan and you want to avoid poor quality air go south..

Don't go north.. The more north you go, the air quality sort of deteriorates a lot..

So if you go north, it will deteriorate.. But once you cross Islamabad, it will start improving again by because by that time you're in the mountains..

So you know this is one thing that you  need to know as a piece of advice..

Next slide please..

So what is sensor monitoring doing?. We now have come to know all over the country which cities are polluting the air the most..

So Lahore is usually taken as the poster boy or the poster child of bad quality air.. But really it is the city of Pash which is sort of much ahead as compared to Lor..

But Feslabad, Gujarala, Salkot are all cities in this province but we are not looking at it or we were not looking at it because the census had not been placed.. But now both the government departments and the urban unit through epic have have got census over here..

Next slide please..

And this I think it's a bit hard to see but these are the 14 cities in which censors have been placed.. And I said as I said you know the pattern is clear..

As you move south towards Karachi and Kuwait you will see number of days which are sort of exceeding the  Pakistani national air quality standards.. So  the northern cities like Feslabad, Pashawar they they have got like or 78 days..

And by the way  this data is 3 months old.. So maximum number of days would be like 32 or would be something like 90 plus..

So this is not 365 days.. So please don't try to add up and try to make it 365..

This is from July to September 2025.. And if you look at this data, you will see that  you know the city of Kuwait had absolutely  all all its days were within the national environmental quality standard as far as air was concerned and  I think  it had only one day which exceeded the daily world health organization guidelines..

So city of Kua is far south in Baloistan.. If you had seen the map, it's  it's almost near you know Iran..

But you know wherever the economic and the industrial hubs are there, you would see a deteriorating  quality of air..

So  I mean I would not go over each and every city but you can see that  how this how the number of days get distributed.. So the first three cities had did not have any good day in the last three months as far as air quality is concerned..

Pashawan and Gujarala had no good days.. Lahor and Rahul Pindi out of 90 days had just three and one had four days..

Moderate days were somewhere in between.. But look at the unhealthy days for sensitive groups..

The number is very very high.. You know it's more than 50% of this time period..

Next slide please..

And this is just an animation.. We'll just simply run through it..

we also sort of collect this data and try to put it in one slide.. We have got a dashboard running..

So right now the urban unit has almost developed its app..

So we'll have an app which is reporting on this 160 sensors and that will be a contact in the sense that as you travel and wherever you're traveling.. So if you are traveling to Islamabad the sensors from Islamabad will ping that your smartphone and that will actually  tell you the air quality in Islamabad..

So that's for the citizens.. So it's a really simple one sort of a one page one one landing page which will tell you the air quality the t and everything else and also a health advisory with it..

Next slide..

We also sort of correlated this data with  more sort of sophisticated equipment and it sort of it had almost a correlation of 888.. so the sensors are pretty much  you know correlating themselves with more sophisticated air quality measuring stations..

Next slide..

Next slide..

You can see it from this.. And finally once we have once we are through all these actions on the ground and trying to correlate your sensors with the more sophisticated air quality measuring stations..

Once you have sort of transversed all that then you come to this larger discussion of air quality standards and this is one one that we had about 10 days ago u and everybody is for air quality standards but everybody also wants to contribute to air quality standards..

So you know they want to be part of the network but when you standardize something of obviously there has to be a discipline to it..

So right now I think  Parky has a point of view on that..

Right now there is a bit of a friction going on in between these  the sort of this proliferation of these lowc cost sensors which is a really good thing..

It is giving us more data more information.. We can sort of verify and crossverify so many of our actions..

But it at the same time there is also that we need to sort of standardize what we are doing at some level because only then then you can actually start talking about air quality standards..

So standards is in quotes.. Next slide please..

And we are coming right to the end of this presentation.. Next   if you look at  the left of your screen guideline for non-reference monitor sensors..

This created a lot of splash.. I sort of sat on the fence when it came to these guidelines..

But I I also see the government point of view and I also see the non-governmental point of view.. Obviously a guideline is like the government trying to encroach upon what you are trying to do..

But sort of what I want to also clarify what the government's point of view is.. The government points of view is that we want to build a network and we want to build a network in which we have non-reference monitor sensors also as a part of it..

Obviously we have a resource constraint.. We just cannot be providing all sensors through the government end  and we would love and welcome to have  civil society, the private sector contributing to this data gathering exercises through their own sensors..

But at the same time, we would also like to remind them that they they also share a responsibility when they're reporting this data.. You know, because this data can either under reportport or it can over report and because it's the government responsibility to take necessary action in the field at the local level..

We would like to have data which is consistent, which is reliable.. But it's like threading a needle..

You don't want to encroach upon something but at the same time you also  want that that thing should be reliable enough so that we can actually trust the network and this is what we are trying to build right now as we speak..

We are trying to actually build and integrate this thing into a network.. A network in which everybody is an equal, everybody has a voice and everybody realizes its responsibility that reporting air quality data is so very important for this country and for the cities and the cities and the citizens living in you know in these cities..

we have sort of made a you know pros and cons of reference monitors versus low cost sensors..

this thing the government also actually realized that the portable sensor is something very very useful.. You just cannot have a reference monitor on every street or on every neighborhood..

That's just too expensive.. You cannot have them in in every city also..

But every intermediate town, every small town, every intermediate city can can have low cost sensors.. And those lowc cost sensors can then start feeding in the data at a regional level..

So your actions would then sort of transform themselves from local level, neighborhood actions to perhaps city level actions and then from city level to even regional level actions..

Next slide..

I think we are at the end.. at the same time urban unit is also trying to build a air quality index or trying to sort of evolve itself in forecasting models..

This is again we are breaking  new territory over here this year.. fingers crossed we hope our forecasting forecasting model works but that I I because I went to MIT I can I can tell you this thing  this is really hard stuff you know so there are a lot of optimistic expectations about it but I'll be  much more sort of  conservative in my view that how quickly we can have forecasting models about it  we are you know this data is now being picked up by the media Also this is one good the media has started onto the dashboards taking pictures of the dashboards picking up the data and then sharing it you know u so a staff reporter has said this is what the air quality in the hall is this is what the air quality is so the so more information is available openly the more people will start talking about it the more it will sort of go into the press go into the social media go into the electronic media and this is actually what is happening in the last 10 days..

Every news program you will see some talk about poor quality air  or about this particular season.. Next  it was a real privilege launching the air quality monitoring network..

I mean we I mean these were celebrations installing an air quality sensor.. It was a photo op, you know, and  it's it's it's the cute little sensor, you know, everybody wanted to be photographed with it..

Next  we also arranged like civic town halls on smog and you know on conversations about smog in lor by by code for Pakistan that's another non-governmental organization..

So this is I think a peculiar domain of the urban unit.. We sort of transgress very easily into civil society..

The civil society recognizes us.. Sometimes they call us traitors..

Sometimes they call us friends.. But we are in both worlds and that's a difficult role to play but so far  things are going good for us..

And finally I think we had a get together of all the epic awardies from Pakistan arranged by the world wildlife fund..

so we share our experiences, we share what the government is doing and what the government should be doing better and and these messages actually get transmitted through the urban unit to the government.. more pictures, academia, community engagement and partnership and that's my team..

you are already show seeing me on the screen.. So it's it's not a very few people make a very big difference..

and that's pretty pretty much the team which has been working for the last one year on the on the low cost sensors which have been provided by Apple.. So a big shout out to my team that was really great work by them..

The sensors are online.. They are working..

And the thank you slide is basically each vertical stripe represents one day of air pollution and visualize seasonal variation.. So the slides are really the bad slides..

So in between you see the summer season, the monsoon seasons where there are a couple of sort of trails of blue, but usually it's red or dark red.. So air quality is bad throughout the year..

Thank you so very much for a very patient hearing.. I'm sorry I think it went like into half an hour instead of 20 minutes but it was  wonderful sharing this thing with you..

Thank you.. >> Thank you for that..

That was fantastic.. really enjoyed it..

I hope it inspires more people to want pictures with air quality monitors.. That would be wonderful at minimum more people around the world were excited by that too..

so we have a few minutes for maybe a couple questions.. We'll see if we can fit in two or three if that works..

well one  you know I was sort of intrigued when you said  earlier that there's a few anecdotal  stories you might have about how like having data has sort of eased or facilitated conversations with with government folks and and the reason I think  it would be wonderful to hear one or two of those and the reason I think it's  helpful is because I think sometimes  these sort of informal quick conversations  the way that we use data can it's it's hard to  appreciate that at a at a at a either externally from far away or for those not working in in in government and policy  it may be hard to appreciate that the the role of data can can have for this even informally which sometimes can be so important for actually getting stuff done..

So anyway  I would love to hear one or two of those those anecdotes you had mentioned.. >> Yeah..

So you know Christa  you know I want to put it out right up front there's a distinct impression that the government is making all these efforts without looking at data..

I think I think because we do not take our own pictures or project ourselves that how much data that we are looking at  you know we have got let me give you anecdotal evidence I'm at the m at the moment member of about five high level WhatsApp groups on air quality in Punjab and in the city of Lahore in which we have cabinet members in which we have high level officials in which we have techn technical people who are looking at data which is coming from IQ air which is coming from UU sensors which is coming from their air quality monitoring stations and trying to figure out what is going on..

you know some somebody would say it's due to traffic or there is congestion then somebody would come up with the Google map and it will actually show a traffic forecast that yes this road this arterial road is going to be congested and it's likely that the air quality  poor air quality level is going to increase in this particular neighborhood..

Once you have this sort of granular information then what happens is that that group sort of starts coordinating what can we do about controlling it..

So the slide which I showed you about those tall buildings in Lahore you know this was in a neighborhood a neighborhood of Lahore which was very high in very very you know average income of this neighborhood I can confidently say is $100,000 plus perom big houses and electric cars and everything and they were suffering from terrible air quality and nobody could understand what was going on in this neighborhood there was no industrial area near it..

The roads were wide.. Every was vizzing past in cars and everything else..

There were very few motorbikes and there was a lot of green space also and trees and everything.. And then finally somebody realized that it's the fugitive dust coming up from the sports stadium which is being built over there..

At that time it was being constructed.. So simply a sports stadium or a cricket stadium which is being constructed you just cannot imagine that the spike which that thing was actually creating reading near the sports stadiums were 700 plus..

So you you might be a very very welloff person but you are living in an in which you are breathing really poor quality air.. So you know how to start targeting these type of interventions because when we look at sensor labor data we look at the outliers and we think now this night and this day our first job is to bring these numbers and we do our very best you know in trying to sort of take whatever actions..

It only it is not only sprinkling the construction side.. It is some sometime also sprinkling the shoulders of the roads because as cars go by and if the shoulder is not paved or there's no asphalt on it and it's just dust that dust becomes then the fugitive dust and if there's a lot of traffic on the road and especially vehicular traffic it blows up a lot of dust..

I live on a main arterial road actually tell you that our  that my bedroom curtain sort of is replaced every year because it just gets dirty by the dust which is actually you know coming in from the from the traffic which is flying on the road..

So you know these are the small level interventions which we have identified through experience what to do about it..

you know movement of trucks and heavy vehicles has been changed to nighttime or to to times when the air quality as it's at its minimum so that that does not you know spike the  air quality numbers so you know many things are being done at the local level I cannot write a guide book on that I can tell you this evidence is being appreciated for action now the second part is Once you have done that and once you have done everything else you have sort of  gained the trust of this very skeptical government machinery that whether these air quality sensors are worth something..

So let me give you the final anecdote and that was  only like  week ago.. The government introduced the small guns and I think it was in the press also..

U you know there's a whole debate how effective the small gun is and how ineffective the small gun is..

But the senior minister insisted that I want to test this small gun and I want to test what is the effectiveness of it.. I want to actually see before and after air quality numbers around the region or around the area in which the smog gun has been tested..

And that's where your air quality sensor the portable air quality lowc cost sensor came into being.. The environment protection department had fixed air quality monitoring stations and they really needed sensors to be deployed in the area where the small guns were being used and that's we in the city of law then sort of redeployed some of our sensors from some public buildings to where the small guns were being used and sort of started measuring the effect of that and it had it has a significant effect but at a marginal level you know the out it's some people say it's 13%, some people say it's 24%..

But it has an effect.. But you know once you start doing this you start appreciating the value of data and then you start appre appreciating the source from which that data is coming..

So the secretary environment protection department talked to me and said we really want your sensors to be part of our of our network because we have got the air quality monitoring station.. They are very expensive but we for this season we really want your sensors to be part of our network..

So right now the government is not trying to shove away the lowcost sensors..

It's trying to bring in the lowc cost sensors and all other you know  agencies and individuals and  non-governmental organization which are actually doing this work..

What what we are only trying to sort of strive for is that we have a responsibility for reliability and transparency and every sensor should sort of you know follow a certain guideline to sort of conform to that but  you know anecdotal evidence of using data for action the sensors have transformed this..

So once the sensor goes out from Lahore to the city of Kasur which had no sensor before city of Kasour is in play then then you can start talking to the local administration that what is going on as far as the quality of air in this city is concerned and that's about hardly 30 mi from the city of Lor 30 to 35 miles so the poor quality air in that city if that is not checked is also going to affect the main city of Lor..

So you know once you start the map in this way then you can see that you know it's not only the city of Lahar that I have to sort of take care of it's all these intermediate cities which are also experiencing really poor quality air..

So you know it's the portable lowcost sensor which is giving this visibility to government  which perhaps relatively speaking was not there two years ago..

>> That's super super helpful  and insightful.. I think it gives a lot of granularity to to what the data can do..

And I will ask one one last question.. to be respectful of your and everyone's time, but one question we like to end on is  we we've had a host of other questions we we're not getting to that were asked, but I will say a lot of them had to do with  you know getting your advice on on doing something similar where they are based across the world..

And so would you have advice?. What would your advice be?.

and you can take this for if this was another government agency  in another part of the world or if this was  maybe a civil society group if they're starting from zero  and and don't have a sensor network.. You've now launched  you know 160 plus really  in previous monitoring as well..

what advice would you would you have for a group that's  you know operating on  a tiny budget  but has aspirations to to start you know go from zero to something in terms of air quality monitoring  what would your advice be whether it's it's technical or more you know broader from a policy impact standpoint what would you say to them >> I think  my first advice is to be very polite about it  you know in the sense that You are asking somebody  to install a sensor in a place where that person is also has the prerogative to refuse you that you know a government agency can refuse you that no we are not going to install the sensor..

a private house or a building can refuse that we are not going to install the sensor.. And when you install the sensor, you also sort of  you know reach a informal or a formal agreement with them that they will take care of that sensor..

But more important to this is is it's always very transactional.. I you know I must confess that this relationship is transactional in the sense that especially government agencies when we were installing sensors on their buildings they used to say what are we going to get out of it and we used to say that what you are going to get out of it you're going to get out of it a lot of good projection this is government's priority number one and you are helping in that priority number one without even lifting a single finger you just install a sensor and that sensor has started reporting and you sitting in the education building or the school education building, your building is now contributing data as far as air quality in the city of Lahore is concerned or XY Z..

So the public sector buildings sort of got on board very quickly number one  because we sort of conveyed to them that it's their sensor.. It's not the urban unit sensor..

It's not the epic sensor.. It's their sensor and you are you are you are an informant in this entire sort of struggle to control the quality of air..

You will be a key person in that.. So you know it's really important the sensor goes offline..

People see it in the map and everybody says what's going on over there?. What's the reason the sensor has gone offline?.

So sometime it's a electricity cut or the power has gone off or somebody tipped over the wire and they you know they went home and nobody sort of forgot to switch on the sensor back..

So things like this thing you know you know happens..

So one thing that you have to really engage with people to install that sensor you have to project them that they are part of the group.. It's not like you are doing them a big favor..

you actually they are doing you a big favor that they are they are opening up their building their space to install that sensor and you know at this you know at the same you know once let me be very honest with you once we had won the award I was bit skeptical that how are we going to convince 160 odd individuals to install sensors and to keep them running That's the most important point..

You know, I can install the sensor and then I can just forget about it..

But all the sensors are running.. I mean most of them are you know are running and whenever there is there is a stoppage we have one person who calls them up and they say  I actually forgot about it..

The power went off.. We we switched it off..

We will switch it back you know back again..

But you know this is very important..

So to build a sensor network you really have to engage with people.. It looks like a very simple exercise but never diminish their importance in the sense that you are asking them to be part of the network..

Although I also realized that they're not playing it and and the photographs you know play play a very very big role in it..

You know all these photographs these were government officials who were being photographed..

So you know   this is the lowc cost sensor in inauguration..

We are the urban unit.. We have the flex and the flex is in the background..

Picture taken.. Good..

It's on the website and it was on the website.. So  and they can go and check it on the website that the urban unit has sort of projected them and everything else..

So it matters a lot.. It matters to the ordinary citizens a lot..

So you know you you have to really engage people in this exercise to make it to to make them believe that they are part of this entire group..

So our team right now is not the urban unit six or seven individuals which you saw on the slide..

It's basically those 160 public spaces and private spaces where they have got these sensor installed.. And in fact as an afterthought that's the picture I should have ended up with not my own mugsh shot in it you know but really that picture because these are the people which are keeping the network alive just imaginary security situation at the moment..

But the sensor is working.. Just imagine the Pashawar sensor is working..

The Feslabad sensor is working.. Karachi sensor which is about 700 miles from here..

All of them are working.. So somebody someplace is playing a very proactive, very positive role and really I need to acknowledge all those people who have got these sensors in their buildings and not of all not all of them are public sector..

some of them are are actually private sector or commercial buildings which have allowed this thing to happen.. So really I must acknowledge that..

>>  I think >> yeah that is that is great  great advice and  I think  yeah I think tapping into human agency  and and motivation is is the key the key to probably solving anything.. but certainly keeping a a large  disperate network operating  that that that's incredible and I think useful advice for  many of those around the world who are looking to do something  you know start just starting  the process of measuring air quality..

well thank you thank you so much.. Thank your team so much..

Thank  all all 160 different  you know public spaces and the people that are helping keep those those monitors run..

it's truly truly an incredible effort.. >> No, I think thank you Epic..

you know it has been a wonderful one year for us..

you know when I look back and  my team made this presentation so I was looking at it in the morning and the best slide was when I looked at the map and the sensors were running..

We actually have a dashboard unfortunate.. Have we taken the fireball down on that?.

>> Yeah.. >> Yeah, >> it's our website..

>> So, it's it's on our website.. You can actually look at it..

unfortunately, you know, because of  the IndiaPakistan security situation in May..

you know, because of cyber attacks, we under government regulations, we can keep the  data available  nationally..

But  from outside you know there are strict instructions to have a firewall on on government  you know  websites and everything else..

>> But for this special day I think on this special occasion we have taken the firewall down.. So you know people can people can really look what 160 sensors they do wonders you know I mean    I don't I'm I'm actually running out of words like you know on that because I was  when we won I I I remember I gave a very sort of a exhilarating type of a speech but in my heart I was a bit skeptical..

I I thought you know 160 and I used to say to my team well we could have done with about 60 was the need for 160 but they pulled it off you know I I remember you know there was a lot of letter writing so you know there were used to be an official letter with my signatures that you will be part of a network this is so important for the country and everything and you know people volunteered  So I mean this was not under direction..

let me let me be very frank with you.. No there was no direction from any government agency or anybody else that please install these sensors..

This was government actually volunteering to a sister agency.. Okay we will we will have your sensor on our roof or on our you know porch or something like that..

so that's  that's where we are and we are so happy to be part of this network.. No, it's it's truly truly incredible and and and thank you and everyone involved again and  for those  in the audience  if you are interested in learning about  various data  air pollution data activities whether there are funding opportunities or other activities going on  in our broader community..

in the chat  Mary I believe has shared a link to AirWatch our monthly  publication and as well as put in a  way to subscribe if you're not already subscribed.. and with that we'll close out just by saying next month in November we'll have a rescheduled  webinar next data to action webinar with Thailand  various folks various experts on clean air action in Thailand from  data to policy  will be in that session as well as a journalist..

It should be quite good  and I believe there will be a link in the chat for that.. So  one more thanks  to you  Omar and your team and I hope you all have a great rest of of your evening..

>> Thank you.. Thank you Christa and thank you Epic and thank you everybody for attending this seminar..

Thank you.. Thank you..

Take care.. Take care..

Byebye.