# YouTube Video Transcript
# Video ID: pMBzedQI9y0
# Language: en
# Type: Auto-generated
# URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMBzedQI9y0
#
# Transcript:
#

of EPIC's air quality life index program designed to spotlight concrete examples of how air quality data is being used around the world to drive meaningful change.. Our aim is to  learn directly from the leaders who are turning numbers and data into action and to cleaner air and ultimately longer lives..

, and , and speaking of cleaner air and longer lives, , the AQI's latest update to measure how much longer we could live if our air were cleaner came out just last week.. It shows that reducing fine particulate air pollution could add almost 2 years to people's lives globally..

, we've also revamped our website to provide more data customized to where you are across the world.. And you can access those both here at this link and I believe also a link that'll be shared in the chat box..

the report also highlighted  a finding from open AQ that 5.5 billion people across the world live in countries without access to a minimally recommended amount of air quality monitoring.. and this is especially true  in the African context where at least as of this 2021 analysis, no country met the the minimum threshold..

and I believe that this lack of data across the world  and in Africa is symptomatic of a larger issue.. a lack of investment in air pollution especially relative to the harm it causes..

So you'll see this figure here  which shows  the philanthropic investment in Africa per life year lost from life expectancy  in in US dollars per in millions of US dollars per year.. and so you see for HIV AIDS  $985 million are invested per life year lost on the continent for malaria 98 million..

yet for air pollution it's  just $186,000 per life year lost.. that's about 5,000 times less  than other those other two two issues..

And so to respond to this this larger investment problem,  we launched the Epic Air Quality Fund in 2024,  we identified countries  that showed especially high opportunity for a modest investment in air quality data infrastructure or air quality management in particular.. And you can see these in this image  where there's the the dark or light purple colors..

and we've so far been able to invest in in  31 groups in 19 countries.. And one of  the awardies from our very first round before we'd actually even officially launched   was the nonprofit Perium Health that  they focus on improving lung health in the Gambia  and beyond..

so I'm especially honored to host this session today.. I'm going to stop sharing my screen here..

because it highlights the remarkable progress  being made in the Gambia over the past few years  not just by peran health but also the Gambia's national environmental a environment agency  which closely partner together so we're fortunate to have with us two of the central figures driving this work in the Gambia  Dr.. Dada Baji Dr..

Baji is an environmental scientist and policy leader and is the executive director of Gambia's National Environment Agency.. The NEA is the advisory body to the National Management Council in Gambia  which the president  of the country chairs..

And Dr.. Sunrew Tore, he's a pulmonologist and founder of Peran Health..

Peran Health as I mentioned is a nonprofit that promotes lung health in the Gambia and beyond.. And one of those ways is in engaging  in air pollution issues  in the Gambia..

So together, the NEA and Peran Health have built a partnership that not only measures air quality for the first time at a national scale in the country, but it also connects that data to health and policy and public action.. And you'll get to hear about all this  in the next hour or so..

, as our conversation unfolds, I'll ask all of you in the audience to submit any questions you may have using the Q&A feature, and we'll get to some of those  toward the end of our conversation.. , so with that, I want to thank Dr..

Baji and Dr.. Tore again for for joining us..

and I'd like to start off by talking a little bit about  their journeys into air quality work.. And  Dr..

Baji, I' I'd love to start with you in particular  and hear a little bit  about the first off the NEA's mission  and its mandate around environmental issues including air quality.. Thank you very much  Christina..

I thank you so much for  that elaborate introduction and then it's a pleasure also to be part of this very important  session with all the stakeholders around the world and then also your university for hosting this important  garden..

Yes, as you rightly said, the National Environment Agency is mandated by law to manage all environmental issues across the country and that is it is an act of parliament that established against you over 30 years ago by the first republic and basically all mandate cut across all the three medium of of the environment air land and water.. So and then we work towards ensuring that those three mediums are conducive for human and from your in  from your presentation I've seen a very stacking statistic and when you talk about issues related to malaria and other diseases and you look at the air aspect it's actually there's not much work globally particularly in Africa when it comes issues related to and I always say in in in most of the food I said Because AI is free..

So people don't take in about it because it's a gift of nature by God.. So people don't take it seriously as if and most of the issues that are related to very serious eat diseases are actually can come from there..

So in a sense  this is something that also as a country we actually have some legislation towards that one since 1999 dealing with issues related to air quality and and but not actually very serious issues were done over the past years in addressing.. Some time back we had some air quality monitoring but they were damaged you know in 2000 during one of our student riots and since then the agency and the next stakeholders could not do much in addressing those issues..

So there about 2023 we had this engagement with Pameia lung health institute and this is a very very important collaboration where we are we were able to have installation of a lot of air quality sensors across the country and then we are proud to say that we have installed almost 20 or more air qualities across the country and that actually entire country and you know data is very important when you are trying to change the minds of policy makers and at some point when we first populate one of our our our our data over one year I presented that one the national environment is managed by a council the national environment management council which actually the president serve as the chair and the vice president ser as the vice chair and that council the members of the council constitute 10 ministers 10 ministers dealing with so it's a a mini cabinet and the agency serve as a secretary and also serve as an advisor to both the president and the council on environmental issues when they are direct directing issues related to policy aspect and so forth..

So this become a very very when they saw those result they were very this is what is happening I say yes this is what is happening and then there's a need for us to do something to ensure that people are aware and then that include the ministry of health the ministry of environment the ministry of energy the min almost all the minister of finance and actually become a very broad so when they saw those informations they were very much and each of them were given information and they were very interested to read those things and they realize that This is what is happening in the country and some of the issues that particularly in certain areas what those are things that are basic that people are doing that is affecting them..

So this is something that really create an eye opener for us and currently and in fact we have also work on legislation that is now strengthening issues related to air quality and and and also that those legislations easily even they're almost currently at the third reading at the national assembly national assembly..

So hopefully they on recess but hopefully when they are before the turn of year that legislation will be and the president actually is ready.. we said whenever they are done I'm ready to endorse my whatever is so at least we have that sense of direction from from from from policy level based on the data that is shown because before we don't have this and that that was if you want to talk about something if you cannot see evidence particularly politicians I always say something which is also I said everybody want to go to heaven but nobody want to die but if you know what is going to kill you you always try or what can lead to your death you always try to be careful..

So when you give this information to politicians they become  particularly the policy maker at at that level political level they realize  this is something that we need to work on or this very very important we need to work on it.. So essentially this is some of the things that  that  that we are going and then we also have we the coverage to all level because we have in very sensitive areas particularly where a lot of activities like the airport we have the Gambia Port authority the stadium certain sensitive areas the fist landing fist smoking sites and particularly within the urban per urban areas we have a lot installation and then also in some growth centers across the country up to the far far is the UR which is the last so and then there are also our team we have a very delegated team with Premier group we normally go to visit those  those  to see their conditions make some necessary monitoring what they are doing here and So at least in fact not long ago they were all along in the field they came up with a a report of almost all the you can see the report that was sent for almost seeing the condition see what what is happening around that end..

So this is something that  that we are working on but still to really have a very good universally universal coverage we need more of this where possible and also we realize that there's a lot of health implication some of the things that we are doing from this air quality and in the Gambia the air quality is has different almost three different scenarios there are particular area where you have what you call the peak period of where you have a lot of pollution particularly during the dry season and that is actually influenced by so many factors because during the dry a lot of dust a lot of activities going on and you also have another what we call a transitional period where maybe doctor will during the presentation we will show those scenarios and then you have also a transitional period where from that is the dry season is basically January towards March that is a very dry and you have a lot of dust coming up particularly in the Hammertown or whatever that also have some influence in our country and there the quality of the air is totally not conducive and also you have during the transitional period of April to June which is also there is not as much as good but but better than than than January March and you have what you call a period which you consider as a very comfortable period that's the period we are in which is July August or September end of September we have rain and now we don't have much of those problem but in addition to that we have other area which I called hotspot area you'll see it in the presentation where they are doing a lot of fish smoking and also sometime areas related to certain municipal dump sites where there are a lot of uncontrol even we doing a lot to ensure that this unnecessary bonding burning of waste and so forth is controlled and we're doing a lot of effort to monitor those things regularly to and that has reduced drastically now because of our interventions and so forth..

So we have a lot of things that we are doing both from the policy perspective and also  in terms of bing open bonding is also we have in fact that's a a nogo area and also strengthening and the the transport system that we are even working with the ministry of and the police because we have an MO with them so that some of the air emission vehicles that are really polluting are stopped..

straight away when they they applying on the road because we once had a report trying to see the effect of those emissions from the vehicles which are which is very very interesting.. So we we work with the police and also we involve because realize that most of the impurities are actually trapped by the by by by by by trees and we came up in fact currently I'm working with the office of the president and the ministry of what we call Gambia go green initiative this is something that we working on and then to ensure that we have at least change our baring areas into green so that that will able to capture most of these air pollutants and suspend them rather than so that is also that is initiative that we have started we call it EG triple GI Gambia go green initiative which we are I'm working with the hopefully we will we next time you come to Gambia you'll see a different phase particularly in our urban urban urban areas so we also have that collaboration we also look into other collaboration because at this what we have we realize that is not much in many of the regional countries so we see how we can collaborate with our particular our neighbors sineagal Mali and other echawas countries how can we work together to fight this problem of qual air quality because it's a problem and and and the only way you can really raise the problem is providing information data that you can present and people recognize this situation in in in in in in in those aspect..

So these are some of the thing that we are looking into and then we are collaborating greatly with some of those is particularly some of the environment protection against industal and so forth and then we also have to look at leverage where we can get support..

It's not natural.. It's easy..

But we'll also welcome any international support where we can get through clean air funds where possible to support our our our our initiative.. We are not standing by but we we I always say to people that you know if you are on the road there's likely that somebody will find you there and help you to move forward to your destination..

But if you are sleeping in your house thinking that you want to go to a place and you are not on the road, that's likely that you'll be there for long because nobody's going to.. But if you on the road, somebody may find you whether it's going to be a bicycle or a tricycle or a car, somebody may find you sitting there but or walking and say, ", where are you going?.

Can I take you give you a ride to this place?" Then then we are moving..

But if you are sitting somewhere and said, ", I want to go to the next village, but I don't know who's going to take me there..

If you don't start walking, you know, God is going to find you on the road..

So this is why we felt it is also important we have to start a process and then that process is going to at least also see other people to find us on something that is and then the government also is ready for that because they have now seen the importance of what we are doing but and that document is something that has really changed and I can remember the finance min this is very interesting you know they don't want to give out money in particular but I told her Now this is what is happening and the health minister will say I think now finance you have to look into how can you support this initiative..

So so we are not funded by them directly now as a government institution because we are we as a we are not there but we can come up with certain thing that we can also leverage on certain funding mechanisms and they can support those initiative..

So in a sense  these are some of the thing that I want to share.. Frankly the Gambia  the issue of air quality is a concern and then also we also create a lot of awareness..

We really want to embark my team even came up with a a concept node where they want to go around the country which we want to look into so that they can actually bring awareness creation on some of the things that we do at household level because you know here also we have what we there are certain essence that is born inside that is indoor pollution but people don't know they think that they are creating something a very good order in the house in the process they are really polluting the entire family and they don't know the implication of that..

So those are some of the things that we do it during in our most of this conference we normally have the air quality content that we had with Pierre health and then those awareness I created but we want to go to the grassroot level to educate people on those things as well..

So these are some of the things that like my house I I told them that I don't need anything of that nature because you don't know what you are doing because if you do it you are killing yourselves systematically and then you don't know what you are doing..

So at least I said I don't want to see these things so don't bring it to to the house.. So at least that awareness has I never knew about those things but now it has really led me to know those kind of thing as well..

So in a sense we also want to get how we can get some more monitors particularly the ban.. So because currently we have a ban that is actually hosted at place at the national environment agency which is a reference monitor but we also want to see how we can improve other areas particularly at regional level but this is something that we are working towards..

We find any other means how we can get it but wherever we can get those will be a good thing.. So in short this what I wanted to share but hopefully Mr..

Dr.. and I know if this is these things are done that likely going to reduce a lot of premature death and protect the vulnerable  groups particularly women who are involved in a lot of  smoking..

We also want to see how we can improve their smoking mechanism.. This is something that we want to look into..

Yesterday I was having a a meeting with Unido and one of the thing that we discussed about the cold chain aspect.. We talked about issues..

How can we come up with a project that's going to improve the the the fishing areas particularly those who are involved with the smoke that area when you pass there you in a pass quickly and look at what the people who are in that kind of a condition for the past how many years.. to and I always tell them sometime we blame God too much you know you know for us when you die  God I said sometime we blame God too much for some of the thing that can easily be prevented so on that note this is what I wanted to share and then hopefully as we discuss maybe we reach that level we'll able to shed light on some of the things that we are doing but I'm very much grateful to be part of this kind of conversation on how can we make the world better particularly addressing issues related to air quality that we just feel it is something that is just cheap because it's a gift of nature and and then let me share something that was a time we involved the religious leaders both all the faith on a discussion and one time one of the religious leader gave a a a small thing..

He said that one of his relative went to the hospital and they put him on oxygen and then after when he got recovered they gave him a bill and they said but the man started crying and said why are you crying?.

The whole doctor said but now you're well why are you crying?.

The man say okay now when I came you know the past how many years over 50 or so years I have been having air from God free and today I'm here for this number of days and then you ask me to you ask me to pay something that I was gi then it is important for us to hold this thing that God has given us with with with with with seriousness Because at the end of the day all the air that have breatheed over the past 50 years at no cost today I'm here the oxygen you have given me now if we pollute what god have given us how many of us can sustain be given oxygen in the hospital so this was something that came from our engagement with the religious leaders and that's the time they realized that  then we have to do something educate people whether in church or in our must so that they have to be very careful in what they do outside to protect the air and make sure that air is conducive for everybody's survival..

This on conclusion that's what I wanted to share with you.. Thank you so much for the opportunity..

Yeah, >> thank you so much.. Thank you so much Dr..

That was  fantastic.. And you know, you mentioned the  you know, you got to be on the road  in order to to get somewhere..

and and I I don't know..

I think you you all might be in a a Ferrari going pretty fast down the road.. with all the activities you all are are doing and have underway..

and you know, one of the  things you mentioned that of course comes to all of our minds with air pollution ends up being  the health implications..

And and so I think that that brings us to to Perian Health and to to Dr.. Toreé..

and so Sunru, I would I'll ask you  you know, you're you're a medical doctor..

You're a pulmonologist.. how how does a pulmonologist get involved with air quality monitoring per se?.

What was a little bit of your path to to get to to do this work?. >> Well, thank you for the  introduction, Dr..

May, thank you for that introduction as well.. I got involved in air pollution by accident..

I finished my training in Massachusetts and  started seeing patients in Gambia and I was expecting to see you know the usual older patient smoker with COPD or asthma patients but then I was struck by a lot of patients that I was seeing who were very young  and especially women who' never smoked in their life  that had very severe  you know respiratory symptoms and you know at the time I was doing lung function testing they had very diseased lung lungs..

I mean, the we have people in their 20s, in their 30s with lung function of a 60, 70 year old person who smoked and that didn't make sense to me.. And I'm like, you know,  something must be driving this..

And it wasn't TB.. we would think about that in in Gambia..

and you know, you are what you breathe..

And so I thought, okay, what is it that people are exposed to that's causing them to have such diseased lungs at a very young age?. in United States if you tell me your address I can pull up the air quality in your neighborhood..

And so I thought well somebody must do some work on air quality in Gambia to see what the air quality is like in the country.. This was about  7 years ago 6 7 years ago now and at that time there was no information on air pollution..

There was just no data.. and so I thought okay we need to start looking into this..

There was some research being done by the medical research council at the time.. and so I said okay we'll it was a nagging clinical question..

basically it is and so after co code co is a bit of a distraction so I after we recovered from covid I decided to start installing lowcost sensors in the country and I started off with four sensors and then I started getting these readings I'm like wow this is actually quite serious you know  and you know what started off as a a clinical question turned out to be  a drive to scale access to  monitoring and so I very quickly realized that the solutions to the problems that I had in my practice was not going to be solved by me at the bedside and so I quickly got in touch with the agency and that's what started this whole initiative  to  build a network for air quality monitoring..

>> Thanks for that and I think that's actually the perfect segue.. so you described how you know you started engaging with NEA..

I think it is the perfect segue into  a presentation you have that'll tell us a little bit more about  both Perian Health and NEA's  work.. So, I'll I'll turn it over to you for your presentation and let me  make sure you're able to share and then I'll set you off..

Looks good from here.. >> , you're muted..

>> yeah, so this  this work is a collaboration between Permanent Health and  and the National Environment Agency.. So like I said when I figured out that we need to do something about this I looked at the  the stakeholders within Gambia and found out that the agency was the legally mandated authority on this issue and we've been in partnership with them and the ministry of health for the past  3 years now..

we obviously can't go installing sensors around the country without any permission.. So I had to get them involved for one of that..

So it's just one of those tips that I would recommend people who are interested in doing this work very quickly  partner with the  local regulatory agencies to do that.. And you know we started off with four sensors and then very quickly we scaled that up..

Now we're currently at 27 sensors across the country..

we also got a reference monitor that we've installed at the National Environment Agency as Dr.. Baja indicated..

And I'm just going to go straight to the  straight to the  to the data because  so this is kind of where we started out from 2022 no data 2023 first sensor and then we also we had our first clean air conference in 2023 and why we did that was because we wanted to get all the stakeholders involved very early on to let them know that we were going to be scaling up monitoring and that we had the intention to make this data available to drive policy change..

We were fortunate enough to get the Epic award in 2024 that then allowed us to then really scale nationally and install the BAM and then in November of last year we put our first BAM  the National Environment Agency and you know this is kind of what we've done over the past few years just collected data from these areas and  we've been analyzing that data now  and for the first time we have this kind of data which is quite shocking >>  that the you for our mean of 2.5 for Gambia is about 98 microns per cubic meter which is really high..

If you think about the fact that the WHO recommends a daily exposure rate of about  you know 15 microns per cubic meter  this is considerably higher than we've had and we've seen that all across our network..

These are sensors that are installed in urban areas.. and you can see as Dr..

indicated that in the dry season between January and April, we have a very high, you know, , there's a dust storm called the Hamatan that blows down into the Gambia..

, PM 2.5 concentrations in those months, you know, are typically in the high 90s, sometimes as far as the 100s to the 400s..

, and a lot of people have bronchitis, , you know, they have a lot of asmax exacerbations, you know, that kind of stuff that time of the year..

, and we see the same in rural areas, but there's a bit of a difference.. Rural areas actually have poor air quality compared to urban areas..

Briamaba and Soma are rural areas on the inland part of the country where Kifig industrial estate and Bigilo are on the coast.. And you can see that the baseline levels that we are getting  in these areas are considerably higher than  in the coastal urban areas..

But we can see in both graphs there's that downtrend that we see with the rainy season when the rains come.. We have  much better air quality  in these areas..

Now this is kind of information that we would not be able to collect if we didn't have a low cost sensor network..

BAMs are expensive.. You can't put BAMs everywhere..

and I will say also that although BAMs are good for reference data collection, they're more accurate and you know  obviously more reliable as far as  policy making..

But what local sensors do is that they give you a general idea of the trend.. And we've seen a good correlation between the trends that we're collecting from our low cost sensors and and the band..

we are in the process of  you know   co-c calibrating the data from the reference  monitor with the with the low cost sensors and we'll be applying the correlation coefficient across the network and with our partner IQ air..

and then obviously I talked about  rural urban inland divides but even within the same town again this I thought to be very fascinating..

Gujour is a town in the southern part of Gambia and we have two centers in Gujour.. one is located in Tap City and Christa we've been there..

It's a high-end you know master planned urban community with green spaces paved roads and then Batate is a fishing village  that is on the coastline..

You can see very from this draw a lot of   you know fishing activity going on..

>>  and we've seen that people that live in Tap City, you know, the average, you know,  PM2.5 concessions in the Hamilton dust season is considerably lower than, you know, in the Barate..

And also the peaks in the dry season are much higher in  in the fishing village than in  in in in in Tap City.. And in the in the rainy season when the air quality is better in both places, you know, taxity was able to get meets the WHO daily limit  below daily limit for the WHO  PM2.5 concentration..

So this is a classic example of you know how where you live has an impact on the kind of air that you breathe and undoubtedly have an impact on you know the health and well-being of individuals in these two different communities that are just 5 miles apart..

And so  again this is the kind of data that having lowc cost sensors can give you that you would not be able to get with the BAM.. And so  with that I wanted to also talk about some of the work that Dr..

Baji has talked about.. We've been able to use this data to write  annual reports..

We have two legislation in parliament that are currently making their way there that were tabled by the minister of environment  the national environment management act that will give the agency the  legal framework to establish  amid air equality standards and the road transport bill which is an upgrade to our motor vehicle act of 1948.. You think about that the last time this was done was before we were a country..

So, so you know this kind of data has the ability to make us reflect on things at a very national level..

, and I'm also very excited about this because now due to our partnership with  IQ Air and the API platform, QTV is now going to be rolling out the use of the API not just for the weather but also for air quality  information in local news   as part of local news network..

So you know multiple people are using this and  I think in the coming year we're going to have especially when the hamatan dust season comes in  people being given you know health advisories u as part of the news in the local languages..

so I'm just going to stop here and  see if you have any questions  any concerns and happy to chime in from there.. >>  thanks for that..

That  was all super cool  very cool news about QTV I have to say.. , and , reminder to the audience, and we're already getting a few questions , put in the the Q&A box, but feel free to put in some questions..

, I've got a few questions for both of you, , as as we're going.. , which I'll ask first..

And the first one's to you, , Dr.. Tori..

, I it's sort of a meta question, , backing out from the data itself.. you know you've talked a little bit about previously I've heard you talk about data sovereignity  and how  I as I understand it it's a core tenant of the the air quality work  that you're both leading and  I wondered if you could talk a little bit about that term why you think it's important  in the Gambian context and if there's anything you could say in a broader context of why data sovereignity  matters for  your work or clean air work at large..

Yeah, I think for for us a data sovereignty  refers to the concept where  data that's generated within a certain jurisdiction or by an individual or an entity is accessible and usable  by those individuals who generate the data for the purpose for which that data was being collected.. it also has a broader concept where a legal concept where data that's generated within a certain jurisdiction should be accessible to any interested governmental agency  that has an interest in that data..

Many African countries and especially the government does not have any data sovereignty legislation.. so when we set out to do this initially we were very deliberate because we wanted to have access to that information and also we had a very big part of our mission being data transparency to ensure that the data we generate is accessible to anyone that has an interest with that and I was very honest I very  you know complimentary to our partner IQ air..

We have a signed legal agreement with them and they give us full permission to  use the data in any way that we see fit which I think is a very important thing that anyone considering this kind of work should consider.. recently we've seen  in some countries that had you know ongoing reference monitoring at US embassies lose access to that data  due to foreign policy changes  in in the United States..

you know those countries that don't have data of sovereignty legislation cannot access that data but the United States has a cloud act that means that in the United States any data that you collect even if it's stored outside the United States the United States government has the authority to access that data and I think it's a clar call for countries around the world and especially in Africa to start thinking about putting in place these legations and we are going to definitely talk to our government about ensuring that we have that legislation u you know in place to ensure that we can access that information for our  national endeavors..

So we are a government entity.. We are partner with the government..

We own the hardware and we own the software.. The software belongs to you know our partners but we have the agreements with them to ensure that  we use the data and we can access the data in and use it for very impactful work that we're doing in the country..

>> Thanks for that.. I think sometimes   these data ownership type  nuances sound weedsy but as you sort of articulated it actually matters a lot for what a country  or community can do  with their data..

Dr.. Baji  over to you a question around  often people talk about you know data affecting policy very broadly but you're you're actually you're you're doing that with this this landmark legislation that's that's underway..

I guess if you could break down for the audience who I think would be very interested to hear how do you see the role of the data that was collected by  the NEA and Perian Health together h how has that influenced this landmark legislation?. How did it did it help it come to be?.

What's sort of the role of data or even the relationships around the data  to to that stage where you're at now with this this landmark legislation on the cusp of happening?.

>> Yeah.. Okay..

Thank you very much.. I think that's a very brilliant  question..

You know, in real life  the issue of data is very critical in at least changing people's  mindset..

You know if you don't really s facts and the facts can only come from data..

If you don't really s fact people don't actually take what you are saying seriously and particularly when you come to when you are deal when you are dealing with ministers who don't have time ministers who want to see how things you know when you are briefing them you have to come with facts and the facts can only come from from proper data..

And before when we talk about problem issues related to data people don't understand and even when we go for monitoring because we don't have the necessary equipment to back certain pollution that is happening in a particular area when you talk about people how do you know that there how do you know that this is what is happening there so this issue of having this data has really supported us in trying to pass those message so what I did when I put this thing in one of our council meeting, I decided to go with this  information and and and and then I share almost every every member every council..

The first one I did was to give the president  those document and then I know it will be difficult for him to read or whatever in terms of having time to look at those things but at least he's aware of this thing and I saw him some of the summary of what he can look into to see there are certain things that you can easily grasp quickly then the other thing I decided when I'm going I was going to the meeting to meet the minister in our council meeting I decided to go with those information and those information are very very key for them to realize that  in our country this is what is happening and I think for them also you don't most of those ministers particularly those who are maning some of very key sector they are highly educated they know they know they know the issues so when they read these things so become very interesting even those who are not very much like the finance minister a finance guy is a finance person but when you look at this information say is it this what is happening here I say yes and you know what this affect you know this one don't know any politician he doesn't know whether you are a politician you are a minister you are what when the air pollute because you have to breathe so when it is polluted it's everybody's concern so what can we do as a country to ensure that so that's why when this legislation went it did not in fact I think it delay from from from there when the legis And you know when you prepare a legislation, it has to go to to what you call cabinet approval..

But this is one of the legislation that went to the cabinet the cabinet.. It was actually even supported unanimously per say because of what it was..

It talks about other environmental issues but the issue of air quality is something that that but we already had a law which is related to air but not very which was which is related to air quality but some sections of the but now we are even looking in the future to have a regulation that is going to be focused on issues related to air quality..

So the data has really and data is what they call the data don't lie figures don't lie particularly if you able to get the necessary instrument to back of what you are arguing and this is what we have done and has really contributed positively towards changing people's so at policy level the acceptance is there and there was a time when the minister when I did my presentation the minister also mentioned something to his colleague to her colleagues say you know what before I was never thought that this is what is happening in Gambia but when I participated in one of the conferences and this data then I realized that  I'm even doing things that are even impacting on my health that I don't know so it was become a gamecher because he participated in most of these and so fig that you cannot deny and he said that that's very important that we have to take some stands to address issues related to that..

So it has really helped us a lot and I know hopefully the next thing if you look at maybe two years or whatever that will able to convince them that  we need to take action even though the action has been taken but we need to take very much formidable action to ensure that and when I also saw them  you have also all this monitored all over the country I say yes we have even though we don't have we don't have them the way we wanted but at it is also a game changer in time to know that in any major you any major place of the country these facilities are there to monitor what is happening there and these are things that you it's not like it is actually automatic so not like it is influenced by any other things so so it's something that has helped data is very key and data help to take informed decisions no data it will be difficult for you to convince people because people have to see what is happening for them to be convinced no supporting information..

It is very difficult because you'll be talking from abstract from a a very abstract kind of situation and people don't rely on those as as kind of situation but data has really helped us a lot as an institution and then our collaboration with Pierre Long institute has really changed a lot and then we are hoping to have more positive change in the country as we move along..

I think it's really helpful hearing your perspective as someone at the senior level in  an environment agency describing >> and then in fact our agency also our role also is to come of it..

So for example if you are that our role is advise what kind of policy directions.. So we we also have some because the Gi run into different different aspect of because we have a lot of the we have 11 programs dealing with different aspect of the environment and in any situation where we see this our install have what you call a state of the environment report that is normally given almost every five years that inform our state of environment in in in the country..

So the last one was even in 2024.. So that is also a policy that is actually signed by the president and the minister to so and then we the state of the environment report where we are now what are some of the situation going on and what are the future things if we don't take this and we see the projection if you don't take this decisions or if you don't take this measures this is what is going to happen..

So this is something that also guide us in terms of and that also have to be backed by data.. If you don't tell them what is happening, what is what is what we are what we are there before what is happening now and what going to happen in the future if these measures are not taken..

So it become a document that is every five years we normally give out that one.. So it's a it's a policy guide and that also inform what we need to do next to address most of this situation and then we have currently we even have the police because of those kind of monitoring aspect we even have a police unit within our our to ensure that we do monitoring effectively and then and then that inspector general of police have already we've already created a police unit and then we are here with them to ensure that those monitoring at all level is done accordingly and we go with them for for for monitoring purposes as well..

So this is as a result of what they see and the real and what we propose to make sure to address this issue is what we need to do moving forward.. Yes..

>> And you had mentioned  in your introductory remarks about you know looking forward and you touched on it here too..

would you talk us through what you see next for  the NEA  really  beyond the the data collection?.

there's now this, you know, landmark policy that's coming in  hopefully to in place..

And so what sort of  activities do you see next in the pipeline?.

Policy type activities do you see next  for for the NEA for air pollution?.

And what kind of support are you looking for to to make these things happen or barriers you see  alternatively?. but would love to hear what you're thinking of next steps for the NEA?.

>> Yes.. So for some of the thing that we intend to do basically what do you call mid short medium and longterm and we can categorize into that some of the short aspect that we need to is to create awareness that is very very important based on the information that we have received based on the data that we have..

So that awareness is there to really reach out to people to tell this what we are doing this is what is happening this is what we can do to avoid or this what we can do to elimmit that one.. So that is very very key when you come to allowing people to be aware of what is happening some of the action that are doing that they are doing that has some implication with respect to the air quality and the other thing that we intend to do is actually to look into possibility of upgrading some of or trying to improve our our monitoring mechanism particularly having the necessary equipment and even when we are going in terms of monitoring because we do that frequently those handheld kind of monitoring equipment that when you go to assess a particular area you can actually be able to give a basic aspect of what is happening there within that facility it's a factory or whatever and the other aspect that collaboration which you also have I particularly mention about that vehicle something track to make sure that we are working with the transport ministry to set up  they they actually leading the process to set up some of this situation where they're going to monitor most of these vehicles before you this emissions control kind of mechanism..

But they need to have a facility where vehicles have to be tested and then be given a certificate kind of so that every peri to regularize your your status in terms of your emission so that you not be a polluting vehicle and any vehicle that don't get that tag will not be allowed to to apply on the road and that also cut across and I told the minister that if you want to do that you have to start from government because most of the government vehicles are the biggest polluters on the road..

So if you going to make that mechanism is not going to be a mechanism going to target only only all only the commercial vehicle we have to start from ourself so that every vehicle have to have a road worthy before it pl on the road.. So these are some of the things that we are working on with the the minister of  of but the other aspect also we are also collaborating with currently UNEP send me we are also trying to work on with the United Nation environment program because they have this air in fact I think on the 7th I think on the seven is going to be international they send me I think on the 7th or 9th any of this they send me some information what are we doing at country level they want to us to share those kind of information at national level what we are doing and see how we can collaborate..

I already actually identified some staff that are already going to be focal point for that and then we are also working toward at national international level with other donor partners to see what can we come up to address..

So as I said now we have a baseline per say now we can also see at Gambian level this what we are working on..

So it become very easy to come up with something that can help to improve what we are doing moving forward.. So in a sense those are some of the areas that but at least for able to have a a very thorough coverage we really need some of these  additional sensors other thing can come in as we as I said medium long other project can come in that is going to improve a lot particularly our our provincial areas but the soft aspects awareness the other things collaboration that we are working on but you know government take a long time but if you also get something that can help for us even with UNEP to help to set up those kind of thing empowering even a private sector to come to set up those centers for for for for servicing of some of these vehicle to ensure that they are satisfied..

I can remember sometime I went on a training in in Singapore and I went to I went to that that vehicle testing facility and then almost every vehicle must have a disc every six month they have to go and change that disc to so that at least they are not polluting whenever they apply the laws are there but as I said most of the violators of the law government is actually the central government..

So we when we come we have to make sure that that is addressed but now they aware of what is happening because the minister of transport and infrastructure is part of the council..

So and and in that council we also mentioned that you know most of the problem also is associated with with with the transport sector..

So they they also aware of what is what is what is happening and he's very much keen about this thing as well.. Say  I never knew about this..

So but thank god they are now aware and that has really changed a positive positively towards whatever we are doing and they ready to support the agency in that and and that has also give us a leverage when I'm looking for other additional support as well..

Yeah, but in in in reality this is what the road map we want to work on and then ensure that we get those aspect and also capacity building in terms of some of the personnel that are also going on because at some point we train some but people come and go but now I try to engage young dynamic people before they think about moving they would have contributed positively but we train some people but they left but that's part of life but but now we also come up with very young and dynamic  people that are that that we are working with at at agency level that are almost involved in most of the activity that is happening across the country and they are very agitated to achieve something..

>> Thanks for sharing that road map and and speaking of of dynamic  people I I will I will switch to somewhat reluctantly I'm going to switch to other questions coming in not not for me because we have some good ones coming in.. and and just a few minutes left, but  we have a good one coming in for really both of you  from Collins Hadoli who's also actually a fellow Epic AQ awardee..

and and he's asking I'll ask you first Dr.. Baji, he's asking you know he's in Malawi  and he's  trying to  working to engage the the government there..

would you have any recommendations for  let's say a nonprofit type group that wants to engage with their their government  on air quality?. Would you have any recommendations for  a group that how they can best go about that?.

you know what what made what made the relationship between Peran Health and and  you also strong for example?.

>> Well actually as Dr.. Sinaru mentioned, you know, he he was coming here and then and and then while he was doing and then he realized something and I think that that and I think I found him to be very very proactive particularly Premier Long Institute I found him to be very proactive because the moment we click it to was a few time because you know we all realize the situation when he started explaining this thing and I also told him you What we also have some legislation that is governing that but anything that is going to make us to be able to give information to people that will be very then they say okay then then that how we started it was just people having a a desire a common desire to achieve something and then when it came it was very very it was just something that just came up and then we just click on and I think that proactiveness and I also work in that line..

I don't want things to be  I just want to particularly if you if you know that what we are doing is right..

I think I don't want much of them to be having a lot of waste.. So I think  if somebody's in Malawi, I would suggest how based on the experience I have with  with doctor I think that could be a a good start and then maybe work with them and then see how they can learn..

they actually share those experience they have with us to call it in Malawi I know I know the the Malawi I don't know who is responsible of air quality whether it's the Malawi they have what you call environment diretory or whatever under a particular ministry but I don't know who is but at least I know some some some officials there in Malawi and I have no problem if if they need more I can actually talk to them based on the experience experience I I I have but I I'll suggest that the experience I have with Pierre Longheld Institute could be very much useful if they want to start from somewhere and then they can also leverage from the experience they have with Pia have in Gambia to be able to sell those kind of things at that level..

But the management in terms of environmental protection in the department of environment I think I was there some time back but a little bit some years ago at in Malawi but I know a lot of them because we meet at international level most of the people at that place the environment we I know I know them..

So I will suggest that at least for a start and then trying to know the experience that has I suggest at least they can engage long health institute and see how they can take it up from there and for us also if they need other experience how did we really influence our our our politician policy makers that what we can do but the basic thing first has to be intact first you have to get the information you have to get the data and it become very easy for you to be able to talk to people when they see the when they realize that this is what is happening..

But if you want to go on and talk on a abstract level, it doesn't going to help a lot because they want to see  but what are you saying but what can what can you show to say that this what is happening in the country.. So these are things that  that that that can be done but our based on the experience we can also share with them on on on what we have learned some of the challenges we have faced and how can we address those kind of thing or how did we address them as we move along..

Yes.. >> Thank you..

Thank you.. And  yeah, I think  not not only thank you for the the the advice, but even the offer of connection is is fantastic..

And I will I'll I'll take this question to Dr.. Tore..

I I suppose the same question of how any advice you might have for  Collins who's trying to engage with the the Malawi government and maybe also  in our in our last minute here just also offer you the the opportunity to broaden that out to any other advice you might have for  an initiative similar to Peran Health  that's  organically developing elsewhere across the world  and and any advice you might have in in their journey that from your experience I think the first thing would be to identify the stakeholders in the in the country that you're working in.. identifying who is the legally mandated  authority for   air quality legislation in that country..

partner with them and partner with them very early  involve them in the conception phase.. What we did in Gambia was that we  did the first clean air conference and at that conference was the NEA, the Ministry of Health, basically anybody that I thought would have an interest in, you know,  air quality monitoring to ensure that we build a coalition of  you know, actors that are localized to that jurisdiction..

and then you can come up with a mutually agreed on plan that okay, we're going to scale our monitoring and the idea of this would be that we will be using this data to inform policy..

I think it's important to recognize the role of lowcost sensors in  geographical geospatial  assessments but also recognize the limitations in terms of their their sensitivity their accuracy for policy making.. So a hybrid platform is by default the architecture that you would need if you're going to be  intending to influence policy..

So we were very cleareyed from day one that we were going to get a reference monitor.. We make sure we got the monitor but don't also we use a lowc cost sensor..

Local sensor are much cheaper.. They call them low cost but it's a misnomer quite frankly because the cost of purchasing them is just one part of it..

There's a maintenance cost involved.. U but they're easier to install..

They're you know much more nimble in terms of where you can put them..

But while you're doing that intentionally pursue reference monitoring with the intention that that data is going to be used by the regulatory authorities to make decisions.. They're not going to rely on sensor data for that information..

, and so also the private sector, you know, we partnered with real estate agencies at Tough City..

We partnered with the TV stations.. , because for me that's what I'm most excited about because when QTV starts talking about the weather and air pollution, that is massive public health, environmental health literacy, elevation at scale..

, you know, and they've embraced this on their own accord..

And I want to shout out IQ because their platform, the APIs are very easy to use.. , you know, and and and it's going to be local news..

So when we have that comeatan dust storms they're going to start giving people warnings and actually the ministry of health for the first time issued health advisories based on the data that we have and I think how we streamline that process start issuing health alerts you know in a more consistent more formalized way would evolve over time so again ministry of health ministry of environment transport energy urban planning you know we're going to be sharing our data in gour to the ministry of urban planning to demonstrate to them that look how we build our urban spaces has an impact on air quality at a very local level..

, and so that is the how I would go about doing this and getting them the government agencies involved at the onset is going to make it a lot easier cuz I would not have had permission as a private organization to put sensors at the airport at the seapport.. I mean they're going to that's just illegal, right?.

So but with NEA, you know, as our partners, it was a no-go just a formal request and we were able to install them in these areas..

So  that that that's going to be the main advice that I would give to anyone who wants to do this  at scale in those countries.. >> I think we just got a master class in this last hour of of for for groups across the world on how to really effectively engage in partnership  as a as a civil  society actor and a and a government actor..

And I wish we had another hour to talk about this.. I know we would fill it up just based on on the questions and and the questions I still am curious about..

But  thank you both.. so much for for joining..

Really really appreciate  your your time and  sharing your your brain power  to this to this larger effort.. and thank you everyone else who has joined  in the audience..

I know we didn't get to all the questions..

I will share  a connection between  folks afterwards  for for some of those questions and and appreciate them.. but anyway, as many of you know and as as Dr..

Baji  mentioned  we're we're hosting this conversation in the run-up to the UN's International Day of Clean Air for Blue Skies this weekend on Sunday.. we hope that that day and this conversation you just heard will be a timely reminder that while air pollution is the world's greatest external risk to human health, countries and most especially the people working within them  are showing that progress is possible and you just heard a great example of that here in  the Gambia..

U so please join us for our next conversation..

later this month and also another one in October  in which we'll explore policy work in Thailand and Pakistan.. I hope everyone has a great weekend ahead and happy cleaning air for a blue skies day..

Bye and thank you.. >> Yeah, thank you everyone..

It's an honor.